
--- PAGE 1 ---
AUTOMATEDCYBERDEFENSE WITHGENERALIZABLE
GRAPH-BASEDREINFORCEMENTLEARNINGAGENTS
Isaiah J. King 1,2, Benjamin Bowman 1, & H. Howie Huang 1,2
1Cybermonic LLC, 2 The George Washington University GraphLab
{isaiah, benjamin, howie}@cybermonic.com
ABSTRACT
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) is emerging as a viable strategy for automated
cyber defense (ACD). The traditional RL approach represents networks as a list
of computers in various states of safety or threat. Unfortunately, these models are
forced to overfit to specific network topologies, rendering them ineffective when
faced with even small environmental perturbations. In this work, we frame ACD
as a two-player context-based partially observable Markov decision problem with
observations represented as attributed graphs. This approach allows our agents to
reason through the lens of relational inductive bias. Agents learn how to reason
about hosts interacting with other system entities in a more general manner, and
their actions are understood as edits to the graph representing the environment.
By introducing this bias, we will show that our agents can better reason about the
states of networks, and zero-shot adapt to new ones. We show that this approach
outperforms the state-of-the-art by a wide margin, and makes our agents capable
of defending never-before-seen networks against a wide range of adversaries in a
variety of complex, and multi-agent environments.
1 INTRODUCTION
Automated cyber defense (ACD) systems are agents which, with no human intervention, defend a
network from complex cyber-attacks–automated, or human (Vyas et al., 2023). Like an autonomous
security operations center, ACD agents monitor the network at all times, waiting to respond to a
cyber-attack. When an incident occurs, the ACD agent would have the power to update firewall rules,
reset machines, etc., to prevent the intruder from spreading. Using a simulated network environment,
we can train agents for this task using reinforcement learning (RL). Prior works in this field compress
the environment into a vector and feed it into deep RL networks (Chai et al., 2020; Chowdhary
et al., 2021; Eghtesad et al., 2020; Piplai et al., 2022; Ridley, 2018). This naive approach produces
agents that are adept at defending the network they were trained on, but overly sensitive to minor
changes in the network topology. As such, these agents are rarely evaluated in new and/or modified
environments, a situation that is essential for any technology to be viable in the real world.
This observation coincides with a very old problem in RL: environmental overfitting (Whiteson
et al., 2011). In traditional supervised learning, a model has become overfit if it memorizes every
data point and is unable to generalize about data it has never seen. To account for this, one would
partition the data into disjoint training and testing sets to ensure the model can adapt to uncertainty.
In RL, the uncertainty lies in how an action will affect the environment. Environmental overfitting
occurs when an agent no longer has uncertainty about the world it interacts with. Admittedly, model
overfitting is not a problem in some cases; most RL benchmarks train and evaluate on the same
environments (Kirk et al., 2023), and why shouldn’t they? An agent that plays chess can always
expect the game to start with the same two sets of pieces placed in the same way across the same
sixty-four squares. There is no reason to expect a chess-playing agent to adapt to a 9×9 board with
five knights. But, for many real-world systems, such as ACD, the assumption that the environment
will never change does not hold (Almasan et al., 2022).
One way to represent differences between networks’ topologies and encourage agents to learn poli-
cies that generalize across environments is to represent them as graphs. The use of graphs for
state representation has been done by several prior works in this field (Ridley, 2018; Collyer et al.,
1
arXiv:2509.16151v1  [cs.LG]  19 Sep 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
2022; Gangupantulu et al., 2021), but none process the graph directly. Agents in prior work re-
ceive graphs representing the environment as part of their observations, but when processing them
for their agents, the graph is compressed into a vector, and information is lost. Most often, the
topological structure of the graph is thrown out entirely, and information about individual nodes
is concatenated together (Piplai et al., 2022; Ridley, 2018; Booker & Musman, 2020; Foley et al.,
2022; Walter et al., 2021; Wolk et al., 2022). This results in models that learn about implicit rela-
tionships between nodes but cannot adapt to explicit changes of novel network topologies because
these changes cannot be communicated to the agents. Perturbations as simple as changing the order
in which nodes are indexed can cause these models to perform no better than random.
In this work, we propose a novel, graph-centric strategy for highly generalizable automated network
defense agents. Harnessing the power of relational inductive bias (Battaglia et al., 2018), we pro-
vide our models with the full graph of the network, which they process without compression using
a graph neural network (GNN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016). Inductive GNNs process graph input in a
permutation-invariant manner and are structurally unable to rely on fixed node identities or posi-
tions. Automorphisms between nodes are implicitly understood to GNN-based models as features
and edges are identical regardless of node mapping. However, this is not the case with traditional
models as the columns of their parameters are fixed, such that automorphic node permutations do
not produce identical outputs. The output of this process is a matrix of node representations, called
embeddings, which contain information about each node’s features, as well as the features of their
k-hop neighborhood. The node embeddings are then used as inputs to a policy network that selects
the best action. Importantly, actions are not formulated as a fixed-length list, as is done by prior
works, including graph-based approaches (Janisch et al., 2020); instead, we represent actions as
functions upon individual nodes in the graph. This allows for changing topologies and changing
action spaces. Adding an additional host to a network means adding several more actions relating to
the defense of that host. For tabular methods, this would require fully retraining the agent; with our
method, the action space is already a function of the graph size, so no retraining is required.
This work presents a generalizable framework for graph-based RL that allows for actions upon
nodes and edges, with variably sized graphs. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is the
first time relational inductive bias has been applied to ACD. We will show that our approach finds
defense strategies that generalize better than prior work in the same field. The generality afforded by
relational inductive bias means our agents can be deployed to new environments without retraining,
saving potentially days of training time. In a simulated network environment, our agents score
more than 4x higher than prior works and maintain that high score across environments with varied
numbers of hosts–something the prior works are unable to do at all. In more complex environments,
we show that when we perturb the topology or introduce new adversaries, our models perform
better than all prior works. Finally, we show that our approach is also applicable to multi-agent
reinforcement learning problems. Ours is currently the highest performing non-heuristic policy in
the CC4 (TTCP CAGE Working Group, 2023) environment. The source code for the agents and
experiments is available athttps://github.com/cybermonic/ACD-With-GraphRL
2 RELATEDWORK
Relational Inductive Bias: As in traditional machine learning, an overfit RL agent will optimize its
policy to the random noise in the environment rather than its true distribution. This reflects a high
degree of variance in the model. To counter overfitting, one must increase the model’s bias (Geman
et al., 1992). Inductive bias helps models constrain their search space and reason with more gener-
alized approaches (Mitchell, 1980). Inductive bias can be created implicitly via the choice of neural
architecture, or explicitly by constraining the data the model receives. Motivated by the strong argu-
ments of Battaglia et al. (2018) in favor of relational inductive bias, as well as the numerous positive
results from empirical studies (Hamrick et al., 2018; Janisch et al., 2020; Khalil et al., 2017; Wang
et al., 2018) we represent the networks we wish to defend as graphs.
RL for Automated Cyber Defense: There exist many agents trained for cyber-tasks that focus on
individual entities within networks, or abstract networks into individual units to defend (Eghtesad
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2018). When networks are represented as graphs, they are commonly ab-
stracted into tabular representations for simplicity (Booker & Musman, 2020; Foley et al., 2022;
Applebaum et al., 2022). Works that include graph representations often focus on finding vulner-
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
abilities (Piplai et al., 2022; Yousefi et al., 2018) or automated penetration testing (Gangupantulu
et al., 2021; Walter et al., 2021). While many graph-based ACD agents exist in the literature, they
are often constrained in unrealistic ways. Prior works, (Chai et al., 2020; Chowdhary et al., 2021;
Ridley, 2018; Cam, 2020) all consider the graph structure of networks, and train DQNs to defend
them. However, they all fail to consider what happens if nodes are added or removed, or even if
the order in which nodes are indexed changes. More relevant to our work are the ACD approaches
which highlight the importance of generalization to new topologies. One method to achieve this is
aggregation. Gao et al. (2021) create a generalizable agent by creating an action space that is inde-
pendent of node count and order. Instead, when an action is selected, it is applied to the node that
can utilize it most efficiently according to a value function. Similarly, Gao & Wang (2021) aggregate
the entirety of the network into a single entity to be defended; their observations are the network’s
state in aggregate acrossktimesteps. However, it would be difficult to directly apply either of these
approaches to the more general ACD environments we evaluate, as they are both specialized for
narrow threat models. The most similar prior work to ours is Doorman et al. (2022). They model
the network as a graph and train a DQN to select triplets of nodes to rewire for network hardening.
Their approach is specific to this one task, however, and as we will show, it does not generalize well
to more varied action spaces, but it is notable in that it is fully inductive.
3 BACKGROUND
A graph is a set of discrete objectsVcalled nodes, and a set of edgesE={(u, v)|u, v∈ V}
denoting relationships between them. An attributed graph is a graph with features associated with
each node,f:V →R d. We denote these features asX. Finally, we define node embeddings as the
output of a functionΦ(V,E,X)that processes the graph to encode node features and topology into
a single vector. This function can be transductive, which means it can only produce embeddings for
nodes it has seen during training, or it may be inductive, which means it can produce embeddings
for nodes it has never seen before. We will evaluate both kinds of embedding functions.
A partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) is defined as the 7-tuple
M=⟨S,A,O,R,T, ϕ, p⟩.(1)
Here,Sis the set of states,Ais the set of actions, andp(s 0)is the distribution of possible starting
states.T(s ′ |s, a)is the possibly stochastic transition function that determines the next state given
a state and action.R:S × A →Ris a scalar reward function. The setOis the observation space,
which is derived from the true state via the functionϕ:S → O. Any policy acting uponMwill
only observe the output ofϕ.
Kirk et al. (2023) define context-based POMDPs (CMDPs) as the set of all possible POMDPs in a
space conditioned by a parameter sampled from distributionC. This parameter changes the possible
state space, transition probabilities, and rewards, but not the action space. If we divide the context
space into disjoint sets,M| Ctrain andM| Ctest, the objective is to find policyπwhich maximizes the
reward over CMDPs parameterized from the test space conditioned only on experiences from the
training space.
4 GRAPH-BASEDREINFORCEMENTLEARNING
In this section, we will describe the architecture of our graph-analytic models. We will first describe
how we represent observations as graphs and actions as graph edits. Next, we describe the three
models we evaluated: one transductive model, and two inductive models. Transductive models
assume the size and node-ordering of a graph is fixed, while inductive models can adapt to unseen
environments, with varying numbers of nodes. We used GCN as the GNN architecture, but this
approach is agnostic to the specific choice of GNN.1
1Experiments showed low variance between different choices of GNN architectures. We provide an ablation
study demonstrating this in Appendix B.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
Figure 1: Transductive Actor
 Figure 2: Inductive Actor
4.1 STATE-ACTIONSPACE
States: In all experiments, we use individual hosts as nodes, and forms of inter-host communication
as edges. Other entities within a network can also be modeled as nodes in a graph, with their node
type specified as one of their node features. Unlike prior works which use features derived from
graphs as their observations (Collyer et al., 2022; Wolk et al., 2022), we use the attributed graph
itself. This means agents’ observations are represented by the 3-tupleO=⟨V,E,X⟩, representing
nodes, edges, and node features, respectively. Importantly, we do not assume the agent has full
visibility into the network. The graph provided in the observation may have missing information
about whether hosts are compromised, the possible paths an attacker could use to pivot through the
network, etc., such thatO ⊆ S.
Actions: Following the model of Janisch et al. (2020), we model each game as a system of objects
(or nodes) that have relationships (or edges) with one another. Actions can be performed upon some
subset of nodes to change the environment. Thus, for each actionable nodev i ∈ V a ⊆ V, given an
action spaceA={a 0, ..., an}, actions are represented as functions upon those nodes,a n(vi). This
makes the total action space for an environmentA ⊗ V a. By representing actions as functions upon
discrete objects, rather than a fixed array as is done by tabular methods (Watkins & Dayan, 1992),
we are free to increase or decrease the action space without retraining by changing the size of set
Va.
The results of actions produce graph edits. These edits may be in the form of node or edge additions
or deletions, or changes in nodes’ features. For example, the actiona n(vi)may create a nodev j
with an edge tov i; it could change the feature vectorx i associated with nodev i; or it could remove
the nodev i from the graph entirely. With this abstraction, we can further extend the action space to
include edge-level actions as a function ofan(vi, vj), upon actionable edgesEa. This work considers
environments that have node-level and edge-level actions,A=A V ∪ AE.
4.2 AGENTDESIGN
To combine the information about the graph structure, and its features, we use a graph neural network
(GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2008) to produce node embeddings. We employ a graph convolutional
network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016) for its expressiveness, and inductive abilities. The defining
function of the GCN is
H(ℓ+1) =σ
 
D
1
2 AD
1
2 H(ℓ)W(ℓ) +b (ℓ)
(2)
whereAis the adjacency matrix of the graph plusI.Dis the degree of each node, andW (ℓ) and
b(ℓ) are trainable parameters. For each node in the graph, this function averages the features of its
neighbors, then passes the output through a single fully connected nonlinear neural network layer.
UsingkGCN layers will encode information about each node’sk-hop neighborhood. In practice,
we use the more efficient message-passing paradigm implemented by PyTorch Geometric (Fey &
Lenssen, 2019).
The agent learns via Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). Both the actor-
and critic-networks create node embeddingsZusing 2-layer GCNs. The embeddings are then passed
through additional fully connected layers to produce the probability distribution function, or the state
value estimate for the actor and critic, respectively. We evaluate three methods to convert from node
embeddings to action probabilities. Using the terminology of graph representation learning, we refer
to these approaches as either inductive or transductive (Hamilton et al., 2017).
Transductive models operate as prior tabular RL approaches do. As shown in Figure 1, they concate-
nate the node embeddings into a single, fixed-sized vector, and pass it through a traditional neural
network to produce a single vector of size|V a| · |A|. This approach is not generalizable to new
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
topologies. However, as transductive models tend to outperform inductive ones (Lachaud et al.,
2022), it serves as a basis to demonstrate the maximum potential of relational bias in this domain.
For inductive models, the embeddings for each node must be processed in an order- and length-
invariant way. The simplest way to do this is illustrated in Figure 2. The model passes each node
embedding independently through a fully connected layer, and the output is then flattened. The
actor-network uses the softmax of the flattened output to directly calculate action probabilities (e.g.,
vi,j represents the log-odds of taking actionjon nodei). If more actionable nodes are added to the
graph, the inductive GNN will output a|V ∪ V ′| × |A|dimensional matrix, which can be interpreted
in the same way without retraining, thus allowing for full inductivity. The critic-network, which
attempts to evaluate the value of the current global state, projects each row ofZ Va into a single
dimension, then pools the batch into a single value. This method, which we refer to as thenaive
inductive modelis simplistic, but we will show it is also powerful. However, it has a major drawback:
node embeddings do not have the context of other nodes’ states if they are greater thankhops away.
To address this, we adopt a modified form of the attention-based node pooling proposed by Janisch
et al. (2020). This modification occurs in the node embedding step of the model. In each layer
of the GCN, the embeddings for all nodesZare calculated. Then, the embeddings of actionable
nodes,Z Va, are extracted and concatenated with a global graph state vectorg. We then calculate the
updated global state vector of the graph as
g′ =g+ϕ g

POOLi∈Va {ϕv(g,z i)·ϕ a(g,z i)}

(3)
whereϕ v, andϕ g are fully connected networks, andϕ a is a fully connected network with softmax
activation. POOL represents any pooling function that is order-invariant. The original work suggests
sum-pooling, but this can cause issues when testing in environments that have many more nodes than
the training environment. In this work, we use mean- or max-pooling to address this problem.
The actor-network concatenates the finalgvector to each of the final node embeddings, then uses
the final vectors in the inductive method we previously described. This ensures that each node
embedding contains information about all other nodes in the network, which allows them to weigh
the importance of taking an action upon themselves, vs. an action somewhere else in the network.
The critic network, as it is calculating the global value of the network’s state, uses thegvector
directly as input. We refer to this method as theattention inductive model.
Inductive models also supportedge-level actions. We formulate the probability of taking an action on
an edge as the output of an additional function that takes the source and destination node embeddings
as input. In this work, to calculate the probability of taking an edge action, we calculatef(Zsrc⊙Zdst)
wheref(·)is a fully connected layer with|A E |-dimensional output,⊙represents the Hadamard
product, andZis the set of node embeddings such that⟨src,dst⟩ ∈ E a. The output off(·)is then
concatenated to the flattened probability vector of node-level actions.
5 EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate our agent in three environments of increasing complexity. In each environment, our
agent (the blue agent) defends the network from an attacker (the red agent). The threat model
between each environment varies, but broadly, we assume that the system can be modeled as a
graph of hosts whose security states transition over time between “safe” and “compromised.” These
transitions are governed by both attacker and defender actions. The specific transition dynamics
vary by environment but are always represented within the environment’s MDP. We assume that the
attacker begins with root access to a single host and can take actions that increase the likelihood
of compromising additional hosts. The attacker operates under partial observability of the network,
must scan to discover reachable hosts, and lacks prior knowledge of the topology. The defender
also has partial observability, though the scope and quality of information vary by environment. In
each timestep, both attacker and defender select actions simultaneously. The attacker’s objective is
to maximize the number of compromised hosts over a finite time horizon, while the defender aims
to minimize this quantity.
Table 1 summarizes important details of each environment. For the first experiment, we analyze
the Yawning Titan environment (Collyer et al., 2022), one of the first works to frame RL-based
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
network defense as a graph problem. 2 Next, we evaluate on the CAGE Challenge 2 (CC2) envi-
ronment (CAGE, 2022), which has a more complex action space and a more fine-grained reward
function. Finally, we test our agent in the very complex CC4 environment (TTCP CAGE Working
Group, 2023). In addition to being the largest network we test our agent on, it is also a multi-agent
RL environment. Due to the page limit, please refer to the appendix for additional details on training
configurations, ablation studies, and the details of the testing environments.
Table 1: Evaluation Environments
Network Size Per-node actions Per-edge actions Blue Agents Red Agents
Yawning Titan 10-100 3 0 1 1
CC2 13 10 0 1 1
CC4 32-128 4 2 5 1-5
5.1 NETWORKSIMULATION WITHYAWNINGTITANENVIRONMENT
This environment is a two-player CMDP where a heuristic red agent attempts to spread through
a computer network, and our model attempts to defend it. The computer network is represented
as a random Erd ˝os-R´enyi graph (Erd ˝os et al., 1960). Each node represents a computer, and edges
represent their ability to communicate. Details of the experimental setup and the state-action space
of this environment are provided in the Appendix.
We use the same training configuration as the original work (Collyer et al., 2022). We train models
for 5 million steps on a single random graph, then sample 50 new graphs and evaluate the models
in these new environments without retraining for 10 episodes each. We compare ourTransductive,
Naive, andAttention Inductivemodels to the two approaches from the prior work:Standard Ob-
servationsandGraph Observations. We also evaluate the architecture proposed by Doorman et al.
(2022): a struc2vec-based GNN (Ribeiro et al., 2017) that uses sum aggregation to produce a global
graph vector that is used in a similar way to our self-attention model. Their original approach was
only designed for environments with a single action, but we modified the output to produce likeli-
hoods for|A|actions per-node. Their architecture is similar to ours, but their approach uses a DQN
rather than PPO. It is included here to compare the utility of both RL strategies for this problem.
Table 2 reports the average reward of all 500 episodes, normalized such that 1.0 is a theoretically
perfect score if no hosts were compromised at all.
Table 2: Mean score on random environments (higher is better)
|V|=10|V|=20|V|=40
Standard Observations 0.2511±0.017 0.2310±0.013 0.1683±0.010
Graph Observations 0.2090±0.005 0.3037±0.013 0.2047±0.013
Doorman et al. (2022) 0.7379±0.011 -0.0385±0.011 -0.0300±0.007
Transductive 0.4246±0.011 -0.1327±0.000 -0.0966±0.000
Naive Inductive 0.2681±0.036 0.5439±0.012 0.9308±0.004
Attention Inductive0.8167±0.0090.5634±0.0120.9955±0.002
Unsurprisingly, the transductive model is unable to generalize to new environments. It is likely that it
overfit to the node ordering it observed during training. Both the naive and attention-based inductive
models more than double the tabular methods’ scores. When compared to the other GNN-based
technique, as environments grew more complex, the model became less able to generalize to new
graphs. Despite achieving scores comprable to our models during training, when evaluated on the
new graphs, the Doorman et al. (2022) models failed to generalize. This may be explained by PPO’s
greater exploration ability, allowing it to find more optimal policies in more complex environments
compared to DQN De La Fuente & Guerra (2024). It could also be that the prior work’s choice
of sum for the readout function in their model did not generalize to graphs with varied densities,
leading to oversmoothing. We also observe that when|V|= 40, the attention-based model appears
to have found a nearly perfect strategy. We hypothesize that because it was trained in a more complex
environment, the observations it received during training were more varied, and forced the model to
find a more general policy, while models in smaller environments became more overfit.
2We select this work rather than Ridley (2018) because it has an additional focus on domain generalization.
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
To further demonstrate the generalization of the policies our models learn, we evaluate the high-
scoring|V|= 40models in environments with different numbers of nodes than they were trained in.
Unlike the prior work, which cannot generalize to different environment sizes, our approach is fully
inductive. As before, we evaluated the model without retraining 10 times on 50 randomly sampled
graphs for each environment size. Figure 3 plots the scores of the naive and attention-based models
in these different environments.
Both models, even in the largest environment we tested, still more than double the scores of the
Euclidean models in the simplest environments. The attention-based model achieves higher scores
overall: its strategy remains near-perfect in environments where|V| ≤50. However, it is more
sensitive to the growing complexity of larger environments than the naive model is. While the naive
model has slightly lower scores than the attention-based model, it appears that its simpler design
allowed it to remain generalizable for much more complex environments. Its score also decays
as complexity increases but at a much lower rate than the attention-based model. These results
are likely a result of the No Free Lunch theorem (Wolpert & Macready, 1997), which states that
any increase in a model’s performance in one problem domain must be accounted for by a deficit
elsewhere. These results seem to indicate that the cost of good model generality may be lower
performance in easier regions of the environment-space, but consistent performance across more of
the space.
Figure 3: Scores attained by the|V|= 40GNN models on graphs of different sizes.
5.2 CAGE-2: A SIMULATEDENTERPRISENETWORK
The CAGE Challenge-2 (CC2) was a reinforcement learning contest that aimed to “support the
development of AI tactics, techniques, and procedures...for autonomous cyber operations” (CAGE,
2022). In this scenario, the red agent is trying to reach and compromise a specific, important host
called OpServer0. CC2 provides two heuristic-based red agents: B-Line, and Meander. The B-Line
agent knows the fastest route from its starting machine to its target, OpServer0, and will take the
same path of lateral movements through the network with little variation. The Meander agent is
slower, performing a breadth-first search through each subnet before moving to the next subnet.
Specifics about the state-action space and reward function are provided in the Appendix.
Training:All GNN models are trained using the same hyperparameters and settings. For each
episode, a red agent is selected randomly with even probability. We then simulate 100 timesteps.
After 100 episodes, the agent’s weights are updated according to the PPO algorithm (Schulman
et al., 2017). The agent only uses 4 epochs per update and otherwise uses the same hyperparameters
as StableBaselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021). Both the actor and critic networks use two-layer GCNs
with 256- and 64-dimensional layers. 3 The attention-pooling models use a 256-dimensional global
vector with mean-pooling. All models were trained for 100k, 100-step episodes.
Default Game:Each agent was evaluated on 100 episodes with lengths{30,50,100}against one of
the heuristic red agents. The average score of these episodes is reported in Table 3. We compare our
models to the top two performers from the original competition:Cardiff(Hannay, 2022), an HPPO
approach which trains expert agents against the B-line and Meander red agents, and heuristically
decides which model to use, andKeeping it RL(Wolk et al., 2022) an ensemble-of-ensembles of
PPO models trained against different red agents. These models outperform ours in the competition
evaluation, but not by a wide margin.
As expected, because the evaluation environment is the same as the training environment, the trans-
ductive model achieves the best average score of our models. However, the attention-based model
3An ablation study on this hyperparameter is provided in the Appendix.
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Table 3: Scores on the CC2 Environment (smaller is better)
30 Steps 50 Steps 100 Steps
Total B-Line Meander B-Line Meander B-Line Meander
Cardiff-54.57±0.43-3.47 -5.64-6.41-8.69-13.76 -16.60
Keeping it RL -56.90±0.59 -3.48 -6.47-5.85-10.33-11.39-19.38
Transductive -57.30±0.65 -3.58 -6.25 -6.59 -9.86 -14.09 -16.94
Naive Inductive -62.08±0.63 -4.16 -7.20 -7.21 -10.90 -15.15 -17.45
Attention Inductive -60.14±0.66 -4.39 -6.99 -7.68 -9.80 -14.80-16.48
Figure 4: Evaluation against unseen red agents
 Figure 5: Evaluation of models trained against a
single red agent tested against both red agents
scores almost as high in several instances, and even better in the 100-step game against Meander.
Additionally, the difference in performance between the inductive and transductive models is minor.
Adversary Generalization:While the top models are very good at this specific task, they are also
very brittle and overfit to the environment. In a realistic scenario, we expect the adversary to act in
unpredictable ways. We create two new red agents: Sleepy-Meander, and Sleepy-B-Line. These are
slower red agents; the only difference in their strategy is that at every turn they have a 50% chance of
selecting no-op instead of the move the non-sleepy agent would have taken. Compare this to training
against automated attacker agents, and the defense agent encountering a slower, human attacker for
the first time. We evaluate our transductive model and the CardiffUni model against these new
agents with no retraining. The results in Figure 4 show that this minor, realistic perturbation caused
the Cardiff agent to experience a 1,982% decrease in its score in the worst case.
In comparison, utilizing relational inductive bias allows our agents to learn more generalizable poli-
cies, which is evident in how they can take advantage of the weaknesses of new attackers. For
example, because the Sleepy B-Line agent is 50% slower, our model achieves a 50% better score.
Against the slower meander agent, the Cardiff HPPO agent selects the expert policy for B-Line and
suffers immensely. On the other hand, our agent applies its more universal policy that it learned from
graph analysis and scores slightly better, or about equal to before. These results show that relational
inductive bias allows for generalization to new attackers; next, we will evaluate our agents’ ability
to generalize to new environments.
In another experiment, we trained our blue agents only against a single red agent before testing them
against both red agents. The results of this study are shown in Figure 5. We found that against
unseen agents, our models perform comparably to the HPPO agent evaluated by Wolk et al. (2022).
Interestingly, the agent trained against only Meander scores slightly lower against the Meander
agent, compared to the baseline agent that was trained against both red agents. These results suggest
that the more general policy the default agent learned to defend against both red agents is stronger
than the locally optimal policy the Meander-specialist discovered to defend against a single agent.
Domain Generalization:In addition to new adversaries, it is important to evaluate how agents
behave when faced with new environments. This concern about generalizability was shared by
Wolk et al. (2022), so they devised 3 new scenarios to evaluate their models in new environments.
Scenarios 3 and 4 shuffle the order that hosts are indexed in two of the subnets; Scenario 5 adds
paths from each machine in one subnet to two hosts in another subnet. These changes are made
to the configuration file that generates the environment and are not explicitly communicated to the
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Figure 6: Change in average score under new scenarios proposed by “Keeping it RL” Wolk et al.
(2022)
Figure 7: Change in inductive agents’ scores in new environments with different numbers of hosts.
agents. For all generalization experiments, we evaluate agents with the parameters learned from the
default CC2 environment without retraining.
Figure 6 shows how different agents respond in these new scenarios. We note that even our trans-
ductive model out-performs the prior works, highlighting the utility of relational inductive bias. We
further observe that, as the theoretical backing predicts, the inductive models are unaffected by the
scenarios that change the ordering of nodes.
The scenarios proposed by Wolk et al. (2022) are a good starting point, but we feel that their changes
do not go far enough. In addition to these scenarios, we also evaluate what happens when every
index in the graph is perturbed. We observed that both inductive models’ scores changed by<2%
for the index perturbation experiments, which was well within the standard error we observed in
the previous experiments. However, the transductive model’s average score dropped to -1,950.72.4
From this, we conclude that the transductive model is also overfit.
Finally, we evaluate several new scenarios. These scenarios each involve a different number of hosts
than were present in the training graph, so the tabular methods that we evaluated previously and the
transductive model cannot run without retraining. Figure 7 shows how changing the environment
affects the inductive agents’ abilities to defend the network. In the first four scenarios, we simply add
or delete a node from a subnet. These minor perturbations in the network affect our agents very little.
In both instances where a host is added, the agents’ scores decrease slightly, but this is expected,
as the attack surface increases with every additional host. Removing an enterprise server negatively
affects the naive model, while having very little effect on the self-attention model. The naive model
has only a local view of each node, so it does not know when to prioritize other subnets. As a result,
it rarely attempts to defend the user subnet, opting instead to defend the Enterprise subnetwork. This
inability to shift its attention likely explains the score decrease.
In the last scenario, where the user subnetwork is filled, both agents have difficulty defending the
network, as the attack surface is nearly doubled: 8 new users are added. Like the Yawning Titan
experiments, the increase in the size of the environment affects the self-attention network more than
the inductive network, which highlights the difficulty and importance of balancing good scores in
simpler areas of the problem space with generality across regions with greater complexity.
4For reference, selecting actions randomly will produce a score of 1999.41.
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Figure 8: Action distributions of five CC4 agents. Each was trained independently, but interestingly,
agents defending similar networks, e.g., Agents 2, 4, and 5 found similar strategies. Agent 1 de-
fended the largest subnet, where it learned to analyze more frequently for better information about
the large network it defended, while the latter four focused on enforcing firewall rules.
5.3 CAGE-4: MULTI-AGENTREINFORCEMENTLEARNING
The CAGE Challenge-4 (CC4) (TTCP CAGE Working Group, 2023) extends CC2 into a Multi-
Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) task. Now, multiple agents each defend one of five seg-
mented networks, with actions and objectives similar to CC2. One key difference for this envi-
ronment is its randomly initialized topology. During each episode, subnets are generated with 1-6
servers and 3-10 user hosts. Because networks are variably sized, prior transductive and tabular-
based solutions will not work.
The action space for this environment is similar to CC2. Some of the node-level actions from
CC2 are merged into a single action, and there are two new edge-level actions: AllowTraffic and
BlockTraffic, which create or delete edges between subnet nodes. Specifics about the state-action
space and reward function are in the supplemental material.
We train five independent instances of our self-attention inductive model in this environment using
the same configuration as in CC2 to measure our approach’s applicability to MARL tasks. Each
agent independently learns a unique policy for the subnet it defends. We illustrate the action distri-
bution used by each agent in Figure 8.
Our approach was the highest-performing non-heuristic agent submitted to the CC4 competition
and finished in fifth place overall (Kiely et al., 2025). This result highlights the wide applicability
of graph-based RL in fields beyond simple two-player games. Our agent’s ability to adapt to vari-
able network sizes and topologies allowed us to apply it to this new challenge with only minimal
changes to accommodate the new action space. In a metareview of the competition, the competition
runners identified the inability to adapt to the random initialization of the environment as the main
detriment for other MARL approaches that were submitted (Kiely et al., 2025). Representing ac-
tions as functions upon nodes and edges allowed our approach to naturally adapt to this challenge.
These results show great promise for future research into multi-agent reinforcement learning with
relational inductive bias.
6 DISCUSSION
Limitations. In this work we evaluate our approach on relatively small graphs. In all experiments,
the bottleneck for throughput is the environment, rather than the model. However, with larger net-
works, more optimizations may be required to process observations at a reasonable speed. Another
limitation is the leap from sim-to-real. Further engineering is required to address how the simplistic
actions that agents take would be translated into real-world cybersecurity rules. Additionally, further
analysis needs to be done to determine the utility of ACD agents, and how they would impact the
humans using the networks they defend.
Future Work. We only consider actions that manifest as node-level edits, with the exception of
some simple edge-level actions in CC4. Future work on efficient representation of edge- and global-
level actions within a graph-based RL framework is a promising next step. Additionally, future work
could include new analysis on how to better implement intra-agent communication in MARL, and
studies into performance improvements.
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
7 CONCLUSION
As automated cyber defense becomes a more plausible option for businesses and governments, the
high cost of retraining agents is an important constraint to consider. We have demonstrated that
our proposed agent can generalize and defend never-before-seen networks from attackers with novel
behavior. Because the agent understands the network as a graph and views its actions as graph edits,
its policy is less sensitive to environmental perturbation. We show that our graph-based approach
outperforms top RL approaches in many environments by a wide margin in the face of slight and
major environmental perturbations. Our results show that relational inductive bias is a powerful tool
for improving agents’ generalizability, and a step toward ACD in real-world systems.
REFERENCES
Paul Almasan, Jos´e Su´arez-Varela, Krzysztof Rusek, Pere Barlet-Ros, and Albert Cabellos-Aparicio.
Deep reinforcement learning meets graph neural networks: Exploring a routing optimization use
case.Computer Communications, 196:184–194, 2022.
Andy Applebaum, Camron Dennler, Patrick Dwyer, Marina Moskowitz, Harold Nguyen, Nicole
Nichols, Nicole Park, Paul Rachwalski, Frank Rau, Adrian Webster, et al. Bridging automated
to autonomous cyber defense: Foundational analysis of tabular q-learning. InProceedings of the
15th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, pp. 149–159, 2022.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al.
Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261,
2018.
Lashon B Booker and Scott A Musman. A model-based, decision-theoretic perspective on auto-
mated cyber response.arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08957, 2020.
CAGE. TTCP CAGE challenge 2. InAAAI-22 Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Cyber Security
(AICS), 2022.
Hasan Cam. Cyber resilience using autonomous agents and reinforcement learning. InArtificial
intelligence and machine learning for multi-domain operations applications II, volume 11413,
pp. 219–234. SPIE, 2020.
Xinzhong Chai, Yasen Wang, Chuanxu Yan, Yuan Zhao, Wenlong Chen, and Xiaolei Wang. Dq-
motag: deep reinforcement learning-based moving target defense against ddos attacks. In2020
IEEE Fifth International Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace (DSC), pp. 375–379. IEEE,
2020.
Ankur Chowdhary, Dijiang Huang, Abdulhakim Sabur, Neha Vadnere, Myong Kang, and Bruce
Montrose. Sdn-based moving target defense using multi-agent reinforcement learning. InPro-
ceedings of the first International Conference on Autonomous Intelligent Cyber defense Agents
(AICA 2021), Paris, France, pp. 15–16, 2021.
Josh Collyer, Alex Andrew, and Duncan Hodges. Acd-g: Enhancing autonomous cyber defense
agent generalization through graph embedded network representation. InInternational Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, 2022.
Neil De La Fuente and Daniel A Vidal Guerra. A comparative study of deep reinforcement learning
models: Dqn vs ppo vs a2c.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14151, 2024.
Christoffel Doorman, Victor-Alexandru Darvariu, Stephen Hailes, and Mirco Musolesi. Dynamic
network reconfiguration for entropy maximization using deep reinforcement learning. InLearning
on Graphs Conference, pp. 49–1. PMLR, 2022.
Taha Eghtesad, Yevgeniy V orobeychik, and Aron Laszka. Adversarial deep reinforcement learning
based adaptive moving target defense. InDecision and Game Theory for Security: 11th Interna-
tional Conference, GameSec 2020, College Park, MD, USA, October 28–30, 2020, Proceedings
11, pp. 58–79. Springer, 2020.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Paul Erd˝os, Alfr´ed R´enyi, et al. On the evolution of random graphs.Publ. math. inst. hung. acad.
sci, 5(1):17–60, 1960.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Myles Foley, Chris Hicks, Kate Highnam, and Vasilios Mavroudis. Autonomous network defence
using reinforcement learning. InProceedings of the 2022 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pp. 1252–1254, 2022.
Rohit Gangupantulu, Tyler Cody, Abdul Rahma, Christopher Redino, Ryan Clark, and Paul Park.
Crown jewels analysis using reinforcement learning with attack graphs. In2021 IEEE Symposium
Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2021.
Chungang Gao and Yongjie Wang. Reinforcement learning based self-adaptive moving target de-
fense against ddos attacks. InJournal of Physics: Conference Series, volume 1812, pp. 012039.
IOP Publishing, 2021.
Yazhuo Gao, Guomin Zhang, and Changyou Xing. A multiphase dynamic deployment mechanism
of virtualized honeypots based on intelligent attack path prediction.Security and Communication
Networks, 2021:1–15, 2021.
Stuart Geman, Elie Bienenstock, and Ren´e Doursat. Neural networks and the bias/variance dilemma.
Neural computation, 4(1):1–58, 1992.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jessica B Hamrick, Kelsey R Allen, Victor Bapst, Tina Zhu, Kevin R McKee, Joshua B Tenen-
baum, and Peter W Battaglia. Relational inductive bias for physical construction in humans and
machines.arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01203, 2018.
John Hannay. CardiffUni CAGE2 submission.https://github.com/john-cardiff/
-cyborg-cage-2, 2022.
Jarom´ır Janisch, Tom´aˇs Pevn`y, and Viliam Lis `y. Symbolic relational deep reinforcement learning
based on graph neural networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12462, 2020.
Elias Khalil, Hanjun Dai, Yuyu Zhang, Bistra Dilkina, and Le Song. Learning combinatorial opti-
mization algorithms over graphs.Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Mitchell Kiely, Metin Ahiskali, Etienne Borde, Benjamin Bowman, David Bowman, Dirk van
Bruggen, KC Cowan, Prithviraj Dasgupta, Erich Devendorf, Ben Edwards, et al. Exploring the
efficacy of multi-agent reinforcement learning for autonomous cyber defence: A cage challenge
4 perspective. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, pp.
28907–28913, 2025.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
works.arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rockt¨aschel. A survey of zero-shot gener-
alisation in deep reinforcement learning.Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:201–264,
2023.
Guillaume Lachaud, Patricia Conde-Cespedes, and Maria Trocan. Comparison between induc-
tive and transductive learning in a real citation network using graph neural networks. In2022
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining
(ASONAM), pp. 534–540. IEEE, 2022.
Tom M Mitchell. The need for biases in learning generalizations.Rutgers Technical Report, CBM-
TR 5-110, 1980.
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
Aritran Piplai, Mike Anoruo, Kayode Fasaye, Anupam Joshi, Tim Finin, and Ahmad Ridley. Knowl-
edge guided two-player reinforcement learning for cyber attacks and defenses. In2022 21st
IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 1342–1349.
IEEE, 2022.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations.Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URLhttp://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
20-1364.html.
Leonardo FR Ribeiro, Pedro HP Saverese, and Daniel R Figueiredo. struc2vec: Learning node
representations from structural identity. InProceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 385–394, 2017.
Ahmad Ridley. Machine learning for autonomous cyber defense.The Next Wave, 22(1):7–14, 2018.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
The graph neural network model.IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms.arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
TTCP CAGE Working Group. Ttcp cage challenge 4.https://github.com/
cage-challenge/cage-challenge-4, 2023.
Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, Yoshua Ben-
gio, et al. Graph attention networks.stat, 1050(20):10–48550, 2017.
Sanyam Vyas, John Hannay, Andrew Bolton, and Professor Pete Burnap. Automated cyber defence:
A review.arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04926, 2023.
Erich Walter, Kimberly Ferguson-Walter, and Ahmad Ridley. Incorporating deception into cyber-
battlesim for autonomous defense.arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.13980, 2021.
Tingwu Wang, Renjie Liao, Jimmy Ba, and Sanja Fidler. Nervenet: Learning structured policy with
graph neural networks. InInternational conference on learning representations, 2018.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning.Machine learning, 8:279–292, 1992.
Shimon Whiteson, Brian Tanner, Matthew E Taylor, and Peter Stone. Protecting against evaluation
overfitting in empirical reinforcement learning. In2011 IEEE symposium on adaptive dynamic
programming and reinforcement learning (ADPRL), pp. 120–127. IEEE, 2011.
Melody Wolk, Andy Applebaum, Camron Dennler, Patrick Dwyer, Marina Moskowitz, Harold
Nguyen, Nicole Nichols, Nicole Park, Paul Rachwalski, Frank Rau, et al. Beyond cage: In-
vestigating generalization of learned autonomous network defense policies.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.15557, 2022.
David H Wolpert and William G Macready. No free lunch theorems for optimization.IEEE trans-
actions on evolutionary computation, 1(1):67–82, 1997.
Cangshuai Wu, Jiangyong Shi, Yuexiang Yang, and Wenhua Li. Enhancing machine learning based
malware detection model by reinforcement learning. InProceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Communication and Network Security, pp. 74–78, 2018.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
networks? InInternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URLhttps:
//openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km.
Mehdi Yousefi, Nhamo Mtetwa, Yan Zhang, and Huaglory Tianfield. A reinforcement learning ap-
proach for attack graph analysis. In2018 17th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security
And Privacy In Computing And Communications/12th IEEE International Conference On Big
Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE), pp. 212–217. IEEE, 2018.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
A TRAININGCONFIGURATION
To better facilitate replication of our work, in Table 4, we provide the hyperparameters used for each
model. Due to the length of time required to train each model, we did not run ablation every hyper-
parameter, and instead opted for default settings in most cases. In the Yawning Titan environment,
we selected 5M steps as the length of training time for fair comparison with the original paper. We
selected the lower hidden and embedding dimension in Yawning Titan after initial tests with param-
eters identical to the CC2 environment performed poorly. In both environments, we tested both max
and mean pooling and selected the model that performed best.
Table 4: Model Hyperparameters
YT CC2/4
Hidden Dimension 64 256
Embedding Dimension 32 64
Pooling Function Max Mean
Actor LR 3e-4 3e-4
Critic LR 1e-3 1e-3
Episode Length 600 Steps 100 Steps
Episodes per Update (N) 10 100
Training Time 5M Steps 1M Episodes
All agents were trained on a server with an Intel Xeon Gold 6338 CPU using a maximum of 100
cores to simulate N episodes in parallel. Using a GPU would accelerate training slightly, but the
main performance bottleneck was the environment simulators, which were CPU-only.
B ABLATIONSTUDIES
In this section, we present ablation studies on the number of parameters used by the models, and
the choice of GNN. For all ablation experiments, due to the length of time required to train models
for 1M episodes, we constrain training time to 100k episodes. Otherwise, all parameters are fixed,
and the same as they were for the original CC2 experiments other than the hyperparameter being
ablated.
Hidden Dimensions.In these experiments, in addition to changing the hidden dimension, we also
kept the ratio of hidden to embedding dimensions the same (4 to 1), such that the agent with a
32-dimensional hidden dimension has an 8-dimensional embedding, and the agent with 1028 hid-
den dimensions has a 256-dimensional embedding. Otherwise, all other hyperparameters are the
same as before. We observe that as more parameters are added to the models, their average score
does increase somewhat. However, adding additional dimensions comes at a cost: as models grow
larger, the time it takes to perform forward and backward passes has a steep increase. Our choice in
selecting 256 as the hidden dimension was to strike a good balance between score and efficiency.
Figure 9: Average score (smaller is better) as more parameters are added to the model (standard
deviation plotted as the shaded region).
Choice of GNN.To evaluate the model’s sensitivity to the choice of GNN, we evaluate models
trained in the CC2 environment with several different base GNNs, namely SAGE Hamilton et al.
(2017), GAT Velickovic et al. (2017), GIN Xu et al. (2019). All training parameters are the same,
and models are each trained for 100k episodes. We observe that each model performs roughly as
well as the others. GAT has the best average performance overall, but when the standard error is
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
taken into account, it is only better than SAGE with significance (p= 0.04, whilep >0.1for
the other two models). These results support our claim that the approach is model-agnostic; our
approach is not sensitive to the choice of GNN with statistical significance.
Table 5: Scores of models with different base GNNs on CC2
30 Steps 50 Steps 100 Steps
Total B-Line Meander B-Line Meander B-Line Meander
GCN -80.32±0.99 -5.521 -8.136 -10.718 -12.541 -21.709 -21.698
SAGE -84.23±1.05 -5.458 -9.563 -8.727 -15.069 -19.232 -26.18
GAT -77.59±1.39 -5.164 -9.404 -9.373 -14.282 -16.937 -22.434
GIN -81.44±1.05 -5.809 -8.003 -9.954 -12.802 -22.692 -22.179
C ENVIRONMENTDESCRIPTIONS
The Yawning Titan environmentrepresents nodes with two features each: one representing how
likely an attacker is to be successful at compromising that node, and one representing whether they
have been compromised. Additionally, the full list of edges in the graph representing the network is
also available. We use the combination of node features and edge information as inputs to the GNNs
that power our models. There are also three actions in this environment These actions are all listed
and described in Table 6. In practice, however, we do not implement the Sleep action, as it is always
better to Upgrade a node rather than do nothing.
Table 6: Yawning Titan Actions
Action Description Effect
Restore Removes the attacker from the selected host. Simulates
restoring from a previously saved image.
Update node features to “non-compromised” and reset
the “vulnerability” feature to its initial value
Upgrade Makes the selected host more difficult to compromise in
the future. Simulating a software upgrade or patch.
Decrease the node’s “vulnerability” feature by 0.2.
Sleep Do nothing
The reward function is the ratio of compromised to non-compromised hosts at each time step, with
a 100-point bonus for reaching 500 timesteps without allowing every host to be compromised. If
every host is compromised before step 500, the agent receives a penalty of -100 points.
The CC2 environmentprovides highly detailed observations with a great deal of information about
each host in the network. We only considered the Host, Connection (meaning open ports), File,
and Subnet entities when constructing our graphs from the available data. Table 7 contains a full
description of the features considered for each node type. Entries with an asterisk denote engi-
neered features. Entries without an asterisk are directly provided in the observations emitted by the
environment.
The environment allows for ten total action types, each described in greater detail in Table 8. Unlike
the Yawning Titan environment, in CC2, actions may have a cost associated with them. In this
environment, only the Restore action, which fully wipes a host and restores it from an image, has
a cost of -1. The Analyze action provides more information about the files on a given host. The
Remove action kills any user-level shells on the host. Finally there are seven different Decoy actions,
each starting a honeypot process on a different port. Certain decoys are only allowed on specific
operating systems, and decoys can only be created if the host is not running any other processes on
the port they would occupy.
The reward function for this environment is the number of compromised hosts in the network. For
each user-type host compromised, a penalty of 0.1 points is applied; compromised server-type hosts
are penalized 1.0 points; if the critical assetOpServer0is compromised, there is a penalty of 10
points. The full reward function is the sum of penalties from host compromises and the cost of the
action selected by the agent.
The CC4 Environmentis similar to the CC2 environment. Observations are identical between the
environments with two differences. In CC4, as timesteps progress, the environment goes through
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Table 7: Node features in the CAGE Environments
Node Type Feature Feature type Additional information
Host
Architecture One-hot
OS Distribution One-hot
OS Type One-hot
OS Version One-hot
OS Kernel Version One-hot
OS Patches One-hot
Is Critical* Boolean Applied toOp Server0node in CAGE-2. Means that this node has extra penal-
ties for being compromised
Is User* Boolean
Is Server* Boolean
Files
File Type One-hot
File Path One-hot
Version One-hot
Type One-hot
Vendor One-hot
Density Float
Signed Boolean
User Permissions int[0-7]
Group Permissions int[0-7]
Default Permissions int[0-7]
Connection Is Decoy* Boolean If the connection is to a decoy process running on the host
Subnet None Structural node to connect hosts residing in the same subnet
* Engineered features that are not provided by default
Table 8: Blue agent action space in the CAGE environments
Action Description Effect Cost
Monitor Review network traffic logs for suspicious activity. This
action is taken implicitly every turn, but if selected ex-
plicitly, it functions as a no-op action.
Create edges from host nodes to connection nodes if net-
work activity is observed.
0
Analyze Attempt to learn it if this host has been compromised by
the red agent.
Update node features if it is compromised. Add file
nodes and edges connecting them to host if found during
scan.
0
Remove Attempt to remove the red agent from this machine.
However, if the red agent has privilege escalated to root,
this action will fail.
Update node features if successful. 0
Restore Guarantees the red agent will be removed from this host,
but causes significant disruption to the network
Remove all edges to open port nodes adjacent to the
host. Reset the host node’s features to show it as not
compromised.
1
Decoy Open a port on this host to act as a honeypot for the red
agent. If the red agent attempts to compromise that port,
it will fail. There are 7 types of decoy actions. Each may
only be used if the port it would open is not in use, and
sometimes only if the host uses a specific OS.
Create a new open port node with an edge to connecting
it to the host.
0
AllowTraffic** Modifies a firewall rule to allow communication be-
tween two subnets
Creates an edge between the two subnet nodes 0
BlockTraffic** Modifies a firewall rule to disallow communication be-
tween two subnets
Deletes an edge between the two subnet nodes 0
** Actions only available in the CC4 environment.
three distinct phases. During each phase, there are different firewall rules and communication poli-
cies that are allowed. We communicate the current phase to the agent as input to the global vector
network. The second difference is that agents are each allowed to communicate 8 bits to one another.
We used this to indicate the state of each subnet the agent was defending. For each subnet, the first
bit represented if any host in the subnet had been compromised. We used the second bit as a check
bit to determine the difference between no message (0,0) and a message of no compromise (0,1).
These messages were used as features for the subnet nodes they corresponded to. Another impor-
tant distinction is that agents do not have full knowledge of the network. Each agent only receives
observations about the subnets it defends; their only knowledge of subnets outside of their influence
is through the messages sent by other agents.
Last, the reward structure in CC4 is different from CC2. Rewards are based on the ability of green
agents (representing employees) to do either local work, or access services throughout the network.
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
The red agent attempts to disrupt hosts, and if it is successful, when a green action tries to use it,
it will fail, and the blue agent will be penalized. The exact penalty amount changes based on the
current phase and the subnet of the host the green agent couldn’t access.
17