
--- PAGE 1 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
Available online 25 April 2024
0167-4048/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers & Security
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose
A method of network attack-defense game and collaborative defense
decision-making based on hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement learning
Yunlong Tang, Jing Sun, Huan Wang ∗, Junyi Deng, Liang Tong, Wenhong Xu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Guangxi University of Science and Technology, Liuzhou, Guangxi, 545006, China
Liuzhou Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Processing and Security, Liuzhou, Guangxi, 545006, China
Cybersecurity Monitoring Center for Guangxi Education System, Liuzhou, Guangxi, 545006, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Cyber autonomous defense
Attack-defense game
Hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement
learning
Game learning
A B S T R A C T
Faced with the challenges of security strategy design brought about by the complexity of attack behavior
and the dynamism of network structure, dynamic hierarchical intelligent defense methods have shown
their effectiveness. However, in complex network environments, their application requires a higher level of
coordination mechanisms. Therefore, this paper proposes a hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement learning
network attack and defense game and cooperative defense decision-making method, which autonomously
and efficiently completes the formulation of defense strategies and defense behavior responses. Firstly, we
construct a Stackelberg hypergame model of cyberspace conflicts, and under the condition of information
loss, characterize the multi-layer dynamic defense coordination response mechanism. Secondly, By utilizing
a hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement learning method as the driving force for game evolution, we
sequentially solve the Nash equilibrium of the game, and form a dynamic autonomous defense strategy.
Finally, we construct a hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement learning framework, which decouples the
defense decision problem, reduces the dimension of the defense action space and the exploration difficulty
of the strategy space, and learns coordinated defense strategies more efficiently. We used the CybORG
(Cyber Operations Research Gym) environment for simulation. We compared and analyzed the autonomously
generated cyber defense strategies with other related works, verifying the superior coordination performance
of our method in defense strategy generation and control.
1. Introduction
The global digital transformation has tightly integrated networks
with various industries, leading to the proliferation of cybersecurity
threats. Network security strategy involves the allocation of security
facilities and defense resources, typically designed, planned, and im-
plemented by security experts. The network security strategy profile
represents an organization’s overall defense capability and high-level
security design, making it the most critical top-level design in the
defense system (Waniek et al., 2019). However, the design of security
strategies by human experts faces significant challenges due to the
evolution of attack behaviors and the complexity of network structures.
On one hand, attack behaviors have become multi-process and highly
complex, with the added speed of automation and machine-level reac-
tions facilitated by artificial intelligence technology ( Apruzzese et al. ,
2020). It is impossible for human security strategists to enumerate
all possible scenarios in advance for strategy programming. On the
∗ Corresponding author at: School of Computer Science and Technology, Guangxi University of Science and Technology, Liuzhou, Guangxi, 545006, China.
E-mail addresses: 221077020@stdmail.gxust.edu.cn (Y. Tang), 594588829@qq.com (J. Sun), wanghuan@gxust.edu.cn (H. Wang), dengjunyi@gxust.edu.cn
(J. Deng), 20230702022@stdmail.gxust.edu.cn (L. Tong), xwhat@qq.com (W. Xu).
other hand, the hierarchical organization and dynamic topology char-
acteristics of modern networks make it challenging to apply intelligent
security decision-making methods, requiring the ability to handle and
respond to increasingly complex network security situations. Conse-
quently, designing automated cooperative defense strategies that coor-
dinate multiple security facilities has become a matter of urgency. This
method requires a flexible and resilient defense mechanism, generates
continuous and dynamic cooperative defense strategies, and adaptively
executes real-time defense responses ( Applebaum et al., 2022).
Therefore, the integration of autonomous control theory and net-
work security management has led to a surge in research on defense
strategy games and Autonomous Cyber Operations (ACO). Network
attack and defense behaviors are often modeled as game models, which
qualitatively and quantitatively describe the impact of rational indi-
vidual behaviors in the network space at the system level ( Liang and
Xiao, 2012). Previous studies have analyzed cyberspace conflicts from
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.103871
Received 15 February 2024; Received in revised form 14 April 2024; Accepted 22 April 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
2
Y. Tang et al.
Fig. 1. Convergence of cybersecurity, game theory and reinforcement learning.
different perspectives, including static and dynamic models, complete
and incomplete information models, perfect and imperfect information
models, as well as cooperative and non-cooperative relationship mod-
els. Recent work has introduced information interference or deception
as hyperparameters in game models to recreate more realistic network
attack and defense scenarios ( Cheng et al. , 2022 ). Furthermore, the
network security space is a dynamic and adversarial system, and ACO
research based on learning theory is crucial for perceiving the environ-
ment, allocating network resources, and controlling network situations
in complex networks. The feedback learning mechanism of reinforce-
ment learning enables the exploration and utilization of behavioral
patterns, demonstrating the capability of autonomous network opera-
tions. Single-agent and multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), as
artificial intelligence decision-making theories, are introduced into the
fields of network security penetration, defense, and planning (Adawad-
kar and Kulkarni , 2022 ). In summary, previous research provides a
foundation for in-depth discussions on the following issues.
On one hand, previous research lacks discussions on the interaction
of multiple players in the network security space, particularly the issue
of heterogeneous defenders’ collaborative responses. This constitutes a
complex game model in a dynamic evolving game space. The evolution
of utility functions in this game model requires rational exploration in
the game space. Introducing a learning-based optimal response solving
method is worth considering.
On the other hand, reinforcement learning has demonstrated ex-
cellent performance in various control and decision-making problems
due to its unique learning mechanism. However, in scenarios involving
interactions among multiple rational individuals, modeling different
individual behaviors is crucial for analyzing strategy selection and
game equilibrium. By combining game models, one can thoroughly
analyze the equilibrium states of strategies and efficiently carry out
strategy selection.
Based on the above, as shown in Fig. 1 , this paper aims to com-
bine game theory with learning methods to solve the problem of au-
tonomous collaborative defense strategy decision-making. It proposes
a hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement learning (HMARL) approach
for network attack-defense games and collaborative defense decision-
making. This approach utilizes game theory tools to model cyberspace
conflicts and the collaborative actions of different defense facilities.
It introduces a multi-agent mechanism for rational evolutionary game
modeling, calculates the coordinated optimal response of defense facil-
ity sets, constructs elastic defense strategies, and dynamically controls
Table 1
Table of notations.
Symbol Meaning
 Game model
𝑙 Leader represented by attackers
𝑓 A coalition of defenders constitutes a follower
𝑆𝑙 Attacker strategy
𝑆𝑓 Defender coalition Strategy
𝑃𝑙 Attacker payoff
𝑃𝑓 Defender payoff
𝐼𝑗 Network infrastructure 𝑗
𝑥 Attacker actions
𝑦 Defender actions
𝛩 Information lossy or spoofed delivery parameters
defense actions in real time. The contributions of this paper can be
summarized in three aspects:
• This paper models the network attack-defense mechanisms and
cooperative defense response behavior using the Stackelberg hy-
pergame model (SHM). This model fully captures the characteris-
tics of misinformation and errors in information transmission in
the network security space. It designs the collaborative response
behavior of different types of defenders (followers) to attackers
(leaders), establishes the relationship between the Nash equilib-
rium state and the attack-defense strategy representation, and
constructs a stereoscopic collaborative defense strategy.
• Reinforcement learning methods are used to construct the game
evolution process. This paper introduces the feedback learning
mechanism of agents to dynamically evolve the game model,
optimize the utility function of the game model, enable the de-
fense side to rationally explore the attack-defense space, learn
the optimal response strategies to attackers’ behavior, and adjust
network defense actions in real time, actively participating in
network conflicts.
• A HMARL method is designed to address the curse of dimension-
ality in the action space during collaborative defense processes.
This paper employs the concept of hierarchical reinforcement
learning to decouple the defense decision problem, separating
the selection of defense strategies from the formulation of spe-
cific defense actions. By specializing the reward functions for
different types of agents, it reduces the dimensionality of the
overall defense action space and alleviates the difficulty of policy
space exploration, thereby enabling more efficient learning of
coordinated defense strategies.
The structure of this paper includes the following sections: Section 2
introduces the contributions of previous research from a theoretical
background perspective; Section 3 characterizes cyberspace conflicts
using game theory; Section 4 designs a HMARL model for the dy-
namic evolution of the game model; Section 5 presents simulation
cases, experimental simulations, and their results; and finally; Section 6
summarizes this paper, highlighting the contributions; Section 7 sorts
out the limitations of this paper and points out the future research
directions. For the reader’s convenience, we summarize the notations
that are frequently used in Table 1 .
2. Related work
To integrate game theory models and learning theory effectively, it
is crucial to thoroughly investigate the applications of various types of
game models in the context of network attack and defense. Addition-
ally, it is important to explore extensively how different reinforcement
learning methods can address the challenges posed by the network
security space. To achieve this, we will first discuss the fundamental
network attack-defense game models, followed by an introduction to
relevant research on enhancing network defense capabilities using
reinforcement learning methods. Finally, we will present our own
explorations building upon the previous efforts.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
3
Y. Tang et al.
2.1. Network attack and defense game model
The non-cooperative network attack-defense models transition from
static to dynamic. In static games, literature (Chen and Leneutre, 2009)
abstracts network attack and defense as a two-player static game, where
the actions of attack and defense are represented as probabilities over
network facilities. While this approach allows for the analysis of net-
work attack-defense strategies, it lacks scalability and fails to consider
information transmission within the game. Furthermore, the players
in the game are treated as a unified entity, overlooking individual
decision-making. In contrast, Zhang et al. (2015) consider the imper-
fect and incomplete information scenarios and propose a method for
selecting static active defense strategies based on Bayesian games. This
represents an important extension in modeling network attack-defense.
Regarding dynamic games, An integrated approach has been pro-
posed, which combines different types of games to create a robust,
secure, and resilient framework (Huang et al., 2020). The ‘‘Bayesian’’
feature, as an effective means of capturing uncertainty, is widely dis-
cussed in the field of dynamic security games. The literature (Huang
and Zhu, 2020) discussed Advanced Persistent Threats (APT), capturing
their stealth, dynamics, and adaptability through multi-stage games
with incomplete information, and used numerical experiments to iter-
atively calculate the perfect Bayesian Nash equilibrium, with the game
participants taking strategic actions based on beliefs formed through
multi-stage observation and learning. Hu et al. (2015) considering
the joint threat of APT attackers and insiders, described the above
interaction as a two-layer game model, analyzed the dynamic Nash
equilibrium of the overall game model, and gave a dynamic defense
strategy combining human factors. The literature (Liu et al., 2021)
built single-stage and multi-stage Bayesian dynamic game models, cal-
culated algorithms for perfect Bayesian equilibrium and revised prior
beliefs, and summarized the general rules for network defense using
mobile target defense strategies. The above work has limitations in
the efficiency of deriving multi-stage Bayesian equilibrium from single-
stage. The following developments have broken this constraint. Zhang
and Malacaria (2021) optimized the Bayesian Stackelberg games model
online through a learning mechanism, selecting the best combination
of defensive actions to counter ongoing attacks, to build a decision
support system for network security. This online optimization method
has been proven to be more efficient than traditional equilibrium solu-
tions. Khouzani et al. (2019) proposed a min–max multi-objective op-
timization framework to effectively solve multi-objective optimization
problems in network security defense. In multi-stage attack problems
modeled by attack graphs, the scale of security control strategies has
been greatly expanded within an acceptable time range.
In dynamic games, the partial observation attribute is another
means of characterizing incomplete information, and on this basis, the
difficulty of handling time series problems in dynamic Bayesian security
games is solved. Elderman et al. Elderman et al. (2017) explored rein-
forcement learning methods of neural networks, Monte Carlo learning,
and Q-learning, applied in the partially observed Markov security game
model, to solve the adversarial sequential decision-making problem of
the attacker and the defender. Huang et al. (2018) address the issue
of real-time applicability in game theory by combining differential
game models with Markov decision processes. They used simulation
experiments to solve the equilibrium solution of a multi-stage suc-
cessive attack and defense game. This method serves as a foundation
for applying learning theory in practice. The outstanding work above
represents the exploration of applying learning theory to equilibrium
problems in security game models, and the development of security
strategies from classic design methods to intelligent design methods.
In discussing incomplete information games in the security field,
its feature of incomplete information can be concretized as situations
of unknown attacks, human social engineering attacks, hidden vul-
nerabilities, etc. The core issues it reflects are, on the one hand, the
information asymmetry between the attacker and the defender, and on
the other hand, the deception and misleading behavior in cyberspace
conflicts. Most game models require complete information about the
environment, making it difficult to depict situations with incomplete
information in the conflict space (Zhu and Rass, 2018). Hypergame
theory extends game theory by introducing hyperparameters to char-
acterize the transmission of misleading information, providing a novel
approach for modeling conflicts in the network space (Kovach et al.,
2015). Compared to the discussion of deceptive behavior in Bayesian
games, hypergame theory provides a more comprehensive and macro
perspective to analyze the impact of misunderstandings in complex
conflicts, rather than just focusing on the deceptive behavior itself. The
outstanding work of Zhu et al. (2021) comprehensively summarized
the progress in game modeling and equilibrium iteration in terms of
deceptive defense.
Hypergame network attack-defense models often employ the Stack-
elberg model to capture deceptive network defense strategies (Cheng
et al., 2022). The following works on the modeling of deceptive defense
in the Stackelberg game model should not be overlooked, includ-
ing discussions on deceptive defense resource allocation and deploy-
ment (Milani et al., 2020), network asset obfuscation (Bilinski et al.,
2019), and deceptive network traffic (Anjum et al., 2020). Milani
et al. (2020) allocated defense resources in the Stackelberg security
game based on attack graphs to protect targets, and their proposed
method based on layered directed acyclic graphs brought significant
advantages to the defender. The literature related to this work (Bilin-
ski et al., 2019) treated the attacker as the leader and the defender
as the follower, and simulated the Markov Decision Process (MDP),
studying the potential behavior of the attacker at non-critical points.
The literature (Anjum et al., 2020) designed a deceptive network
flow system called ‘‘Snaz’’ in the two-person non-zero-sum Stackelberg
attack-defense game to mislead the attacker’s reconnaissance. In the
hypergame Stackelberg security game framework, resilient network
defense is constituted by manipulating trust tags, hiding or disguising
core network assets (Bakker et al., 2020; Zhan et al., 2013). In a
research study (Schlenker et al., 2018), the TCP/IP protocol stack of
a networked physical system was modified, and service ports were
obfuscated to construct deceptive operations as hyperparameters for
a deceitful Stackelberg security game model (Nguyen and Xu, 2019).
The equilibrium points of this model were derived, enabling effective
defense against hackers’ reconnaissance of network assets.
2.2. Multi-intelligence reinforcement learning in cyber defense
Many researchers have introduced reinforcement learning algo-
rithms into defense methods to tackle attacks at various stages. Rein-
forcement learning can be applied to enhance the defense capabilities
of the network itself or to increase the robustness of network defense
infrastructure.
In terms of managing the network security space, Hammar and
Stadler (2021) abstract the intrusion detection problem as an optimal
stopping problem and use deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to com-
pute the optimal stopping time. This method characterizes network
defense measures using a simple optimal stopping problem, highlight-
ing the effectiveness of reinforcement learning in complex conceptual
problems. Xu et al. (2022) focus on eavesdropping attacks, a typical
form of network attack. They discuss the continuous control capabilities
of DRL in a network environment, using routing as the control object
to defend against eavesdropping attacks through route randomization.
Optimizing communication strategies to enhance system security is
another important application of reinforcement learning Li et al. (2023)
utilize DRL algorithms to predict network attack paths in industrial
networked physical systems, providing a new approach for attack
traceability and path analysis.
For enhancing network security infrastructure, researchers have ap-
plied reinforcement learning’s dynamic response and autonomous feed-
back mechanisms to energy network intrusion detection systems (Zolo-
tukhin et al., 2020), edge network intrusion defense systems (Liu

--- PAGE 4 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
4
Y. Tang et al.
Fig. 2. Network attack and defense hypergame model construction and iterative processes.
et al., 2020), and software-defined wireless network intrusion response
systems (Cardellini et al., 2022), contributing to network security warn-
ings and blocking attack behaviors at the intrusion stage ( Adawadkar
and Kulkarni, 2022). Wang et al. (2020) dynamically deploy deceptive
resources using reinforcement agents’ policy generation, efficiently
protecting internal network resources and trapping intruding attack-
ers. Zhong et al. ( 2022) focus on the robustness of reinforcement
learning models for detection and utilize reinforcement learning meth-
ods to counteract the generation of evasive detection samples. By
expanding the machine learning training set and increasing the barriers
for attackers to bypass detection, they protect the security of critical
system assets.
MARL extends the discussion of the correlation between agents
based on single-agent reinforcement learning, providing a new direc-
tion for research in the field of autonomous network defense ( Nguyen
and Reddi , 2023 ; Li et al. , 2022 ). The field of intrusion detection
is an early adopter of MARL technology, with many classic works
summarized in the literature (Saeed et al., 2020), many of which have
reached the state-of-the-art level. Adaptive defense or moving target
defense is a widely discussed field at present. The literature closely
related to this paper (Sengupta and Kambhampati, 2020) uses Bayesian
Stackelberg Markov Games to study moving target defense problems,
and iteratively solves the equilibrium state through an independent Q-
learning MARL algorithm to achieve moving target defense. In the field
of dynamic access control, the literature ( Jin and Wang , 2020 ) uses
multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient (MADDPG) to optimize
traffic allocation strategies, showing that reinforcement learning has
application prospects in collaborative threat mitigation based on zero
trust. Some recent works ( Alshamrani and Alshahrani , 2023 ) have
also made attempts to assist network defense with MARL using the
multi-armed bandit algorithm, and discussed the impact of various
reward situations on the strategy. Deception is a behavior with covert
rationality, and it is also a key point of discussion in MARL methods.
The literature (Du et al., 2022) discusses the dynamic nature of network
deception defense in the attack graph scenario, uses reinforcement
learning algorithms to self-play the two-person Markov game attack
and defense model, and achieves adaptive network deception defense
resource deployment by the defender. Similarly, the literature ( Kong
et al., 2023) also discusses the deployment problem of deception de-
fense resources. The difference is that the author models the network
attack and defense problem as a maze pathfinding model, and obtains
the real-time deployment strategy of deception assets by solving the
Nash equilibrium of multi-agent stochastic games. Cheah et al. ( 2023)
is closely related to our paper. They propose a network cooperative
defense autonomous decision-making framework in the scenario of au-
tonomous vehicle queue driving, decompose deep rational cooperative
defense actions, such as network deception behavior, to sub-agents,
similar to dynamic programming optimization methods, to achieve
multi-agent cooperative autonomous network defense.
Building upon previous efforts, firstly, the Stackelberg attack and
defense hypergame model we discuss can effectively overcome the
limitations of previous models, especially the Bayesian game model,
in describing the impact of deceptive incomplete information char-
acteristics on the overall network situation. The introduction of the
hypergame model makes deceptive defense behavior more rationally
profound, and by including the defense follower in the cooperative
constraint to participate in the game, it is an exploration of cooperative
defense games. Secondly, we use MARL methods as the driving force
for the evolution of dynamic games, overcoming the limitations of
numerical calculation methods that are difficult to explore complex
game spaces and conventional heuristic methods that lack rational
exploration. The method in this paper reflects the equilibrium state
through the action strategy of the reinforcement learning agent, which
is a new attempt to generate real-time dynamic defense responses.
Thirdly, the problem of the evolution of game models with high di-
mensions or complexity in the action space of multiple agents has
always been a shackle for the application of reinforcement learning.
More direct iterative methods may not form deep decisions, and more
complex iterative algorithms may not converge. This paper decomposes
the decision-making process, introduces hierarchical thinking, reduces
the dimension and decouples the action space, effectively improving
the application efficiency of reinforcement learning.
3. Cyber attack and defense hypergame model
3.1. Construction of network attack and defense hypergame model
The network attack and defense hypergame model accurately de-
picts the scenario of multi-agent autonomous network defense, reflect-
ing the interaction of incomplete information, imperfect information
observation, and cognitive bias decision-making in cyberspace con-
flicts. At the same time, it analyzes the Nash equilibrium of the network
confrontation strategies of the attack and defense sides and explores
the coalition core form of cooperative defense. The network attack and
defense hypergame model is shown in Fig. 2 .
The network attack and defense hypergame model consists of two
parts. The first part is described by the SHM 1 of the attack and
defense sides, and the second part is composed of the cooperative game
model 2 formed by multiple agents. The defensive agent participates
in 1 as a follower, and its own strategy is constrained by2. (1) gives
the relationship between 1 and 2. In the composite game model ,
all defenders form a cooperative follower alliance f to participate in the
game 1.
 ∶= {1, 2} (1)
The definitions of 1 and 2 will be detailed separately below.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
5
Y. Tang et al.
3.1.1. Network attack and defense SHM
In the scenario of multi-agent cooperative defense,𝑘 defenders form
an alliance 𝑓, which responds to system attacks as followers in the
SHM, protecting resources in 𝑛 network systems. The attacker is defined
as the leader 𝑙, considering the attacker’s first-mover advantage in
general network attack and defense and its continuous influence. (2)
gives the definition of the SHM 1
𝑙𝑓
1
𝑙𝑓 = { {𝑙} ∪ 𝑓 , 𝑆𝑙 × 𝑆𝑓 , {𝑃𝑙} ∪ 𝑃𝑓 , 𝛩} (2)
We consider the strategy space R, where 𝑆𝑙 is the strategy of the
leader, 𝑆𝑙 ∈ R𝐾, and 𝑆𝑓 is the strategy of the follower, 𝑆𝑓 = 𝑆1 ×
⋯ × 𝑆𝑘, where 𝑆𝑖 is the strategy of participant 𝑖. 𝛩 is used to describe
the impact of information transmission, 𝛩 = { 𝜃𝑙, 𝜃𝑓 }, considering the
hyperparameter 𝜃𝑙 as the influence on the leader, and 𝜃𝑓 = {𝜃1, … , 𝜃𝑘}
as the influence on the followers. This inaccurate observation will affect
the payoff function, the leader’s payoff function 𝑃𝑙 ∶ 𝑆𝑙 × 𝑆𝑓 × 𝛩 → R,
and the follower’s payoff function 𝑃𝑓 = { 𝑃1, … , 𝑃𝑘}, where the payoff
of the 𝑖th follower comes from 𝑃𝑖 ∶ 𝑆𝑙 × 𝑆𝑖 × 𝛩 → R.
After giving the definition of the hypergame model, we add the
description of network facilities to express various game elements. The
set of network facilities is defined as  = { 𝐼1, … , 𝐼𝑛}, and the leader,
i.e., the attacker, has resources 𝑅𝑙 to execute actions x. The attack
behavior on network facilities can be described as ∑𝑛
𝑗=1 𝑥(𝐼𝑗 ) = 𝑅𝑙, and
the attacker’s strategy is represented as (3):
𝑆𝑙 = {𝑥|
𝑛∑
𝑗=1
𝑥(𝐼𝑗 ) = 𝑅𝑙, 𝑥(𝐼𝑗 ) ≥ 0} (3)
Similarly, the follower, i.e., the defender 𝑖, has resources 𝑅𝑖to exe-
cute actions y. The defense behavior of defender i on network facilities
can be defined as ∑𝑛
𝑗=1 𝑦(𝐼𝑗 ) = 𝑅𝑖, and the defender’s strategy can be
represented as (4):
𝑆𝑖 = {𝑦𝑖|
𝑛∑
𝑗=1
𝑦
(𝐼𝑗 )
𝑖 = 𝑅𝑖, 𝑦
(𝐼𝑗 )
𝑖 ≥ 0}, ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑓 (4)
After giving a detailed expression of the strategy, we also need to
discuss the definition of payoff. For network facility𝐼𝑗, the attacker gets
a payoff of 𝑃 𝛼
𝑙 (𝐼𝑗 ) when executing action 𝑥(𝐼𝑗 ), and a payoff of 𝑃 𝛽
𝑙 (𝐼𝑗 )
when not executing action 𝑥(𝑘𝑗 ). The defender gets a payoff of 𝑃 𝛼
𝑖 (𝐼𝑗 )
when executing action 𝑦(𝐼𝑗 ), and a payoff of 𝑃 𝛽
𝑖 (𝐼𝑗 ) when not executing
action 𝑦(𝐼𝑗 ). The payoff functions of the attacker and the defender under
the strategy profile (𝑥, 𝑦, {𝜃𝑙, 𝜃𝑓 }) are as shown in (5) for the attacker
and (6) for the defender.
𝑃𝑙(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝜃𝑙)
=
𝑛∑
𝑗=1
( 𝑛∑
𝑖=1
𝑦
(
𝐼𝑗
)
𝑖
)(𝑥
(
𝐼𝑗
)
𝑃 𝛼
𝑙
(𝐼𝑗 , 𝜃𝑙
)+(𝑅𝑙−𝑥(𝐼𝑗 ))𝑃 𝛽
𝑙 (𝐼𝑗 , 𝜃𝑙)) (5)
𝑃𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦𝑖, 𝜃𝑖)
=
𝑛∑
𝑖=1
𝑦
(𝐼𝑗 )
𝑖 (𝑥(𝐼𝑗 )𝑃 𝛼
𝑖 (𝐼𝑗 , 𝜃𝑖) + (𝑅𝑙 − 𝑥(𝐼𝑗 ))𝑃 𝛽
𝑖 (𝐼𝑗 , 𝜃𝑖))
(6)
Based on the above information, we can present the Hyper Nash
Equilibrium(HNE) of the SHM, which is the optimal action and re-
sponse given in the case of information deficiency. (7) expresses the
attacker’s action strategy (𝑥∗, 𝑦∗), and (8) and (9) express the defender’s
optimal response 𝐵𝑅(𝑥, 𝜃𝑓 ).
(𝑥∗, 𝑦∗) ∈ argmax
𝑥∈𝑙 ,𝑦∈𝐵𝑅(𝑥,𝜃𝑓 )
𝑃𝑙(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝜃𝑙) (7)
𝐵𝑅𝑖(𝑥, 𝜃𝑖) = argmax
𝑦𝑖∈𝑖
𝑃𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦𝑖, 𝜃𝑖), ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑓 (8)
𝐵𝑅(𝑥, 𝜃𝑓 ) = 𝐵𝑅1(𝑥, 𝜃1) × ⋯ × 𝐵𝑅𝑘(𝑥, 𝜃𝑘) (9)
With the above SHM constructed, we introduce assumptions widely
used in the analysis of network security games to illustrate the HNE of
this model:
Assumption 1. 𝛩 is compact and convex, the impact of 𝜃𝑙 may be
nothing.
Assumption 2. For 𝑓 = 1 , … , 𝑘, 𝑃 𝛼
𝑖 (𝐼𝑗 , 𝜃𝑖) and 𝑃 𝛽
𝑖 (𝐼𝑗 , 𝜃𝑖) are differen-
tiable in 𝜃𝑖 ∈ 𝛩.
Based on Lemma 2 and Theorem 1 of the Cheng et al. (2022), under
Assumptions 1 and 2, for ∀𝜃𝑙, 𝜃𝑖 ∈ 𝛩, SHM has an HNE. The reason is
that for ∀(𝑥, 𝑦), 𝑥 ∈ 𝑆𝑙, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑆𝑓 , under the game sequence 𝑚, the leader’s
strategy converges to the optimal action sequence.
𝑃𝑙(𝑥∗
𝑚, 𝑦∗
𝑚, 𝜃𝑙) = lim𝑚→∞ max
𝑥𝑚∈𝑙 ,𝑦∈𝐵𝑅(𝑥,𝜃𝑓 )
𝑃𝑙(𝑥𝑚, 𝑦𝑚, 𝜃𝑙) (10)
That is, 𝑥∗ ∈ arg max 𝑥∈𝑆𝑙 𝑃𝑙(𝑥, 𝑦∗, 𝜃𝑙) forms the optimal response
sequence 𝑥∗
𝑚. For the follower, there also exists an optimal response
sequence 𝑦∗
𝑚 composed of optimal response actions 𝑦∗ ∈ 𝐵𝑅(𝑥∗, 𝜃𝑓 ).
However, the stability of this equilibrium is insufficient. The main
reason for the instability lies in 𝛩. The loss of information and the
incorrect transmission of ̂𝜃 can lead to the game participants obtaining
𝑃𝑙(𝑥∗
𝑚, 𝑦∗
𝑚, ̂𝜃𝑙) < 𝑃 𝑙(𝑥∗
𝑚, 𝑦∗
𝑚, 𝜃𝑙), 𝑃𝑓 (𝑥∗
𝑚, 𝑦∗
𝑚, ̂𝜃𝑓 ) < 𝑃 𝑓 (𝑥∗
𝑚, 𝑦∗
𝑚, 𝜃𝑓 ), thus the
strategy convergence will be affected.
3.1.2. Defender coalition game model
The above provides the main game forms of network attack and
defense. Another constraint to consider in this study is the cooperative
relationship constraint among the defense game players. This constraint
is reflected in the defender’s transferable payoff function. The following
defines this constraint through the definition of the cooperative game
model. (11) gives the coalition game 2
𝑓 .
2
𝑓 = {𝑓 ,𝑓 } (11)
A coalition 𝑓 is formed by 𝑘 defenders, satisfying conditions (a)⋃𝑘
𝑖=1 𝑖 = 𝑓, (b) 𝑖 ∩ 𝑗 = ∅ , ∀𝑖 ≠ 𝑗, which determines the structure of
the cooperative coalition. The coalition combined payoff 𝑃𝑓 satisfies
conditions (a) 𝑃𝑓 ≥ 𝑃𝑖 (b) ∑
𝑖∈𝑓 𝑃𝑖 = 𝑃𝑓 , which determines the way
of profit distribution. In addition, defenders in the coalition will share
the perception information of the environment, the impact of lost and
incorrectly transmitted information will be weakened in the sharing
link, that is, 𝜃𝑓 ≤ ∑𝑛
𝑖=1 𝜃𝑖.
The cooperation mode between defenders is based on the formation
of the core, and due to the existence of shared factors, the form of the
coalition will not affect the convexity of SHM.
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = {𝑦𝑖 ∈ 𝑆𝑖|𝑃𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦𝑓 , 𝜃𝑓 ) ≥
∑
𝑖∈𝑓
𝑃𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦𝑖, 𝜃𝑖)} (12)
3.1.3. Discussion on attack and defense SHM and HNE
To clarify the game model proposed in this paper and the dynamiza-
tion process of this model in the following text, we further clarify and
summarize the mathematical definition of this model, deepening the
discussion on the existence of HNE.
The game model proposed in this paper is composed of the SHM1
𝑙𝑓
describing cyberspace conflicts and the coalition game 2
𝑓 describing
multi-defender cooperative defense, specifically in the form of (13).
 ∶=
{ 1
𝑙𝑓 = { 𝑙 ∪ 𝑓 , 𝑆𝑙 × 𝑆𝑓 , 𝑃𝑙 ∪ 𝑃𝑓 , 𝛩} ,
2
𝑓 = { 𝑓 , 𝑃𝑓
}
}
(13)
The optimal solution problem of network attack and defense strategy
corresponding to the HNE of this hypergame model is described as (14).
𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝐵𝑅 (𝑥, 𝜃𝑓 ) = 𝐵𝑅1(𝑥, 𝜃1) × ⋯ × 𝐵𝑅𝑘(𝑥, 𝜃𝑘)
𝑠.𝑡. 𝐵𝑅 𝑖(𝑥, 𝜃𝑖) = argmax
𝑦𝑖∈𝑆𝑖
𝑃𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦𝑖, 𝜃𝑖)
𝑃𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦𝑓 , 𝜃𝑓 ) ≥
∑
𝑖∈𝑓
𝑃𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦𝑖, 𝜃𝑖)
𝑥 ∈ 𝑆𝑙, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑆𝑓 .
(14)

--- PAGE 6 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
6
Y. Tang et al.
Regarding the existence of HNE in this game model, it is detailed
in Theorem 1 of Cheng et al. ( 2022). The difference between this
paper and the problem discussed in it is that the determined SHM is
a single defender as the leader and multiple attackers as followers. The
core issue it discusses is the HNE stability conditions under the two
situations of misunderstanding and deception. Of course, to perfect the
work of this paper, a rigorous approach to proving the existence of HNE
is also provided here.
Proof. Under the premise of satisfying Assumptions 1 and 2 , when
𝜃′
𝑖 ∈ 𝛩, there is a defense gain𝑃𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦𝑖, 𝜃′
𝑖 ), we define 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑦) = {( ̂ 𝑥, ̂ 𝑦)| ̂ 𝑥∈
arg max𝑥∈𝑆𝑙,𝑦∈𝐵𝑅(𝑥,𝜃𝑓 ) 𝑃𝑙(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝜃𝑙), ̂ 𝑦∈ 𝐵𝑅(𝑥, 𝜃𝑓 )} to obtain the optimal
action in the current strategy set. Because, as known from definitions
(3) and (4), 𝑆𝑙 ×𝑆𝑓 is compact, so there exists a convergent subsequence
{( ̂ 𝑥𝑗𝑚 , ( ̂ 𝑦)𝑗𝑚 )}∞
𝑚=1, converging to lim𝑚→∞( ̂ 𝑥𝑗𝑚 , ( ̂ 𝑦)𝑗𝑚 ) = ( ̂ 𝑥∗, ̂ 𝑦∗). Therefore,
it only needs to prove that the result of the limit convergence is in the
range of the function F, i.e., ( ̂ 𝑥∗, ̂ 𝑦∗) ∈ 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑦), to show that  has an
HNE.
In the leader’s perspective, 𝑃𝑙( ̂ 𝑥∗, 𝑦∗) = lim 𝑚→∞ 𝑃𝑙( ̂ 𝑥𝑗𝑚 , 𝑦𝑗𝑚 ) =
lim𝑚→∞ max𝑥′∈𝑆𝑙 𝑃𝑙(𝑥′, 𝑦𝑗𝑚 ). From Lemma 17.30 in the literature (Guide,
2006), we can get lim𝑚→∞ max𝑥′∈𝑆𝑙 𝑃𝑙(𝑥′, 𝑦𝑗𝑚 ) = max 𝑥′∈𝑆𝑙 𝑃𝑙(𝑥′, 𝑦∗),
therefore ̂ 𝑥∗ = arg max 𝑥′∈𝑆𝑙 𝑃𝑙(𝑥′, 𝑦∗). Similarly, from the follower’s
perspective, ̂ 𝑦∗ ∈ 𝐵𝑅(𝑥, 𝜃′), i.e., ( ̂ 𝑥∗, ̂ 𝑦∗) ∈ 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑦). Through Theorem
A.14 in the literature ( Carmona, 2012), ( ̂ 𝑥∗, ̂ 𝑦∗) can be generalized to
the general case, i.e., there exists (𝑥′, 𝑦′) such that for the leader and
each follower, 𝑥∗ = arg max 𝑥∈𝑆𝑙 𝑃𝑙(𝑥, 𝑦∗) and 𝑦′ ∈ 𝐵𝑅𝑖(𝑥′, 𝜃′), therefore,
there exists an HNE (𝑥′, 𝑦′) of .
3.2. Hypergame model dynamic analysis
Network attack and defense is a dynamic and ongoing process, and
network defense work needs to extend the normal operation time of
the network core functions as much as possible during the ongoing
network attack process. Defenders and attackers will reach the game
equilibrium point multiple times in the game space, which is reflected
in (9) where the defender’s optimal response will change with the game
environment. It is almost impossible to complete the numerical analysis
of dynamic evolutionary equilibrium under the super game model, and
its complex game process is the main obstacle to model evolution and
control analysis. For this reason, this paper continues to use the symbols
from the previous text, describes the evolution process of the game
model with the Markov decision process, and embeds the feedback
learning mechanism to guide the evolution path.
Definition 1. Multi-player Network Defense Markov Game Process
from an Infinite Discrete Time Perspective
(1) The set of game players is 𝐹 = {1 , 2, … , 𝑘}, where each player
represents one or a type of defender. Define the discrete time set
+ = {1, 2, …}, at each moment 𝑡 ∈ +, the game players execute
actions and observe the network game space.
(2) Define the abstract action space 𝑖, ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑓. In network attack
and defense, different defenders have different action spaces.
In discrete time, 𝑦𝑡
𝑖 ∈ 𝑖, and an action tuple (𝑦𝑡
1, 𝑦𝑡
2, … , 𝑦𝑡
𝑘)
constitutes the strategy 𝑆𝐹 .
(3) Define the observation space : there is a state observation 𝑜𝑡 ∈
 in the network attack and defense game space at each moment.
(4) Define the state transition process 𝑇 ∶  × ∏
𝑖∈𝑓 𝑖 → 𝛥(). In
discrete time, the next moment state 𝑜𝑡+1 ∼ 𝑇 (𝑜𝑡, 𝑦𝑡), where 𝑦𝑡 is
the set of actions made by the set of defenders.
(5) Define the transition utility 𝑃𝑖 ∶  × ∏
𝑖 𝑖. At moment 𝑡, the
utility 𝑃 𝑡
𝑖 (𝑠𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) can be calculated.
(6) Define the discount factor 𝛾, which adjusts the expected reward∑∞
𝑡=1 𝛾 𝑡𝑃𝑖(𝑠𝑡, 𝑦𝑡).
Fig. 3. Multi-intelligent hierarchical reinforcement learning of autonomous network
defense processes.
Based on the above definitions, from moment 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1, we have
constructed a feedback mechanism ( 15) through utility transition and
action execution.
𝑀 𝑡∶𝑡+1
𝑖 = {{𝑃 𝑡∶𝑡+1
𝑖 , 𝑦𝑡∶𝑡+1
𝑖 }} (15)
By guiding feedback through learning utility transitions, the model
learns a collaborative defense strategy. In ( 16), we define the utility
iteration over time, and in (17), we define the utility iteration guiding
strategy 𝑆𝑓 .
𝑃 𝑡+1
𝑖 = (1 − 𝜇𝑡
𝑖)𝑃 𝑡
𝑖 + 𝜇𝑡
𝑖𝐺𝑡
𝑖(𝑆𝑡
𝑖 , 𝑃 𝑡
𝑖 , 𝑦𝑡
𝑖) (16)
𝑆𝑡+1
𝑖 = (1 − 𝜆𝑡
𝑖)𝜋𝑡
𝑖 + 𝜆𝑡
𝑖𝐻 𝑡
𝑖 (𝑆𝑡
𝑖 , 𝑃 𝑡+1
𝑖 , 𝑦𝑡
𝑖) (17)
Where 𝜇 and 𝜆 represent the learning rates, 𝐺𝑡
𝑖 and 𝐻 𝑡
𝑖 are the strategies
of utility evolution and strategy evolution constructed by the feedback
mechanism, and the evolution of strategies is implemented by the
reinforcement learning agent.
4. HMARL network defense framework
In this section, we present a dynamic evolutionary game model
and propose a HMARL approach for autonomous network defense
decision-making. Firstly, we decompose the problem to establish a
hierarchical reinforcement learning framework. Then, we introduce
individual agents that handle different subproblems.
4.1. Problem decomposition and hierarchical framework
In the evolutionary process of the game model, the strategy profile
determined encounters several challenges: the transition probabilities

--- PAGE 7 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
7
Y. Tang et al.
of strategy states are unknown, the network attack-defense situation is
highly dynamic, information transmission among players is uncertain,
and the cascading effect of multi-agent collaboration all contribute to
an extremely large state space, which affects action decision-making.
To address these challenges, this paper introduces the idea of hierar-
chical reinforcement learning and decomposes defense decision-making
into two subproblems: defense action type selection and defense action
execution. Different-level defense agents are established based on the
decomposition of action space for each subproblem.
In complex scenarios with intricate state and action spaces, in-
troducing hierarchical reinforcement learning to decompose the state
and action spaces proves to be an effective method for reducing the
difficulty of policy search. This approach is widely applied in the field
of complex control and optimization. For example, in Shi et al. (2020),
the behavior of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for cellular services is
decoupled into separate path planning and resource allocation subprob-
lems, enabling step-by-step decision-making at different granularities
and significantly improving network throughput. Tran et al. (2021),
from the perspective of security penetration testing, address the expo-
nential expansion of action space with increasing network complexity
by using a hierarchical reinforcement learning approach to decouple
the action space and decompose the penetration process. This allows for
faster and more stable identification of optimal attack strategies. Previ-
ous efforts provide us with valuable insights. Generating collaborative
defense strategies involves searching for optimal solutions in a complex
and vast game space, where the dimension and scale of the action space
are immense. Therefore, in this paper, the task of autonomous network
defense is decomposed into two subproblems: the selection of different
types of agents and the defense decision-making of each agent.
We establish the first-level defense agent selector to address the
subproblem of selecting different types of agents. In this paper, we
categorize defense behaviors into three types: perceiving and analyzing
network situations, removing threats and restoring infrastructure func-
tionality, and deploying deceptive defense nodes. Then, we construct an
agent selector to handle different network states. The selector activates
the appropriate type of agent to perform the corresponding defense
actions.
Next, we establish the second-level defense action execution agents
to address the subproblem of defense decision-making by the agents.
The defense functionality of different types of defense agents is deter-
mined by their action spaces. When activated, defense agents explore
the action space to determine optimal responses and formulate defense
strategies.
Overall, in Fig. 3, we describe the process of autonomous network
defense using HMARL. Firstly, the defender perceives the attack be-
havior, which is transformed into the observation space. Then, based
on the current network situation, the first-level selector chooses the
optimal defense action type and activates the corresponding type of
agent. Subsequently, the respective agent receives state observations
and makes defense decisions based on them, determining action param-
eters including defense action subtypes and execution target parame-
ters. Finally, the defender executes the defense strategy in response to
the attack behavior.
Furthermore, this paper proposes an independent two-layer agent
architecture, which separates the training and operational phases. The
agents are only allowed to engage in real-world operations within a
network simulation environment once their policies have converged.
4.2. Layer 1 agent selector design
Given the clear task characteristics of this level, the Q-Tabular
algorithm is used to quickly converge and solve the subproblem. Let us
start by introducing the design of the action space, observation space,
and reward function
4.2.1. Action space design
In Table 2, we provide the categorization of the action space.
We classify defense behaviors into four categories, corresponding to
the Layer 2 defense agents. The selector is responsible for choosing
one category of agent based on the current network situation. The
definitions of these defense actions are based on the Open Command
and Control (OpenC2) specifications.
The action space for the selector is provided in the first column of
Table 2, which includes perception action type, deception action type,
recovery action type, and sleep type.
The perception action type is responsible for detecting the overall
network situation. It abstracts the functionalities of network situational
awareness devices and cyberspace probing devices.
The deception action type aims to implement deceptive defense
strategies by transmitting misleading information to attackers in a way
that simulates genuine business activities. It abstracts the functionali-
ties of sandbox and honeypot devices.
The recovery action type involves defensive actions against network
attacks. This includes clearing malicious session connections, ensuring
that user privileges do not compromise system security, and resetting
compromised devices. It abstracts the actions performed by security
experts in network attack and defense scenarios.
The sleep action allows the selector to skip the current game round
and not allocate defense resources.
4.2.2. Observation space design
The observation space is defined as a collection of asset fingerprints
in the network space, which includes the following six aspects: host
information, interface information, process information, session infor-
mation, system information, and user information. These six types of in-
formation are used to distinguish hosts, establish network connections,
provide various types of services for each user, and abstractly present
the overall cyberspace profile. In addition, the formal definitions of
each field also support reinforcement learning training.
4.2.3. Reward function design
The selector’s task is clear and the action space is discrete, but
guiding the selector to make the correct choice requires two parts of
rewards. On one hand, there is the reward from the environment for
the effectiveness of the defensive behavior. On the other hand, there
is the internal reward of the selector. The former part of the reward is
given by the environment after each sub-agent has completed training
and cascades to perform defensive actions under the controller. The
latter part is the reward given by the controller for correctly selecting
the sub-agent. (18) provides the definition of the controller’s reward.
𝑅𝑡
𝐿1 = −[𝐶∕(𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑(𝑜𝑡, 𝑎𝑡
𝐿2))] (18)
At time t, the controller’s reward is 𝑅𝑡
𝐿1, and 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑(𝑜𝑡, 𝑎𝑡
𝐿2) is
the reward for the effectiveness of the defensive action given by the
environment, the construction of which will be detailed in the reward
functions of various defensive agents. 𝐶 is the reward for agent selec-
tion judgment, which is based on the experience of human security
experts when obvious attack behavior is detected. The reward value
is −1 or 1. If the selector’s judgment is the same as the expert’s
knowledge, 𝐶 is 1; if it is different, 𝐶 is -1. In this way, the selector
can balance between quickly converging using expert prior knowledge
and exploring different choices.
4.3. Design of various agents
Various types of defensive agents are parallel to the agent selector
cascade. When activated by the selector, defensive agents inherit the
observation space and make decisions based on their own action space,
generating defensive strategies. In this paper, the observation space
received by each agent is the same, as introduced in the second part
of the previous section. The reward function is a common reward from
the environment. Neural networks are used to explore strategies from
complex action spaces, so we use the Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) algorithm as the training algorithm in the design of sub-agents.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
8
Y. Tang et al.
Table 2
Action space classification.
Type & OpenC2 Action ID Action Purpose
Perceive (1 & 30) Monitor Gathering network situational information
Analyse Identify aggressive behaviors
Decoy (7 & 18)
Decoy Apache Pretending to be an Apache service
Decoy Femitter Pretending to be an Femitter service
Decoy HarakaSMPT Pretending to be an HarakaSMPT service
Decoy SSHD Pretending to be an SSHD service
Decoy Svchost Pretending to be an Svchost process
Decoy Tomcat Pretending to be an Tomcat service
Recover (10 & 23) Remove Kill malicious processes
Restore Restoring a system to good state
Sleep (–) Sleep Do Nothing
4.3.1. Action space design
The action type of each type of defensive agent is a distinguish-
ing point of the agent, as listed in the second column of Table 2 .
Different action types require different action parameters. It can be
intuitively understood that the complexity of action parameters is an
important reason for the large scale of the action space. The parameters
that need to be determined in the action space mainly include three
parts: parameters for constructing network communication, including
IP addresses and subnet divisions; parameters for operating various
services, including target information, processes, and port numbers;
and parameters for determining operation targets, including target
sessions, host names, user names, and privilege passwords. After the
agent takes action, it will correspondingly change the network space
situation, realize game evolution, and coordinate defense.
4.3.2. Reward function design
The sub-agent reward function ( 15) is based on network situa-
tion and action cost. Here, 𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝑜𝑡) is a network situation risk map-
ping, which maps different types of hosts receiving attacks to different
penalty values, enabling the agent to learn strategies to protect key
assets. 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝑎𝑡
𝐿2) maps different defensive actions to different action
costs, enabling the agent to learn how to protect the system at the
smallest cost. Both types of mapping values are hyperparameters, which
we provide in Table 4.
𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑(𝑜𝑡, 𝑎𝑡
𝐿2) = 𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝑜𝑡) + 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝑎𝑡
𝐿2) (19)
4.4. Multi-agents hierarchical reinforcement learning model training
The components described above construct a HMARL model, the
overall framework of which is shown in Fig. 4 . The figure shows
the connection relationships between the components and reflects the
implementation of different algorithms by each layer of agents within
the framework.
In this hierarchical reinforcement learning model, the internal re-
ward of the first layer agent selector is influenced by the global reward,
so the second layer sub-agents are trained first in the algorithm im-
plementation. During the bottom-up training process, each type of
sub-agent inputs the global observation and global reward of the net-
work attack and defense environment. Here, the global observation
is equivalent to each sub-agent being able to perform perception op-
erations, so the recovery agent and decoy agent need to be trained
separately during the training process. The converged sub-agents are
cascaded in parallel under the first layer agent selector. The first layer
agent selector transforms the global reward into an internal reward and
guides the Q-table algorithm together with expert knowledge, enabling
it to quickly converge on the strategy of selecting agents. After the
overall training is completed, the hierarchical reinforcement learning
model can formulate coordinated defense strategies from top to bottom.
The selection of the training algorithm for the agents depends on
the tasks faced by agents. The choice of training algorithms for the
two-layer agent architecture is the result of carefully balancing the
Fig. 4. HMARL framework.
task requirements and the algorithmic properties to ensure efficient and
effective learning for the agents in the given cybersecurity context.
The task for the second-layer sub-agents is to select the sub-action
type under the current security action space and generate the corre-
sponding sub-action parameters, which is a policy generation type of
task. It is not suitable to use the value iteration reinforcement learning
algorithm, so the policy iteration method is utilized for training. The
PPO is a relatively advanced policy iteration algorithm. Compared
to its predecessor, the Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) al-
gorithm, PPO has a smaller computational cost and faster iteration,
making it more competitive. The Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(DDPG) algorithm is not an ideal choice here, as it trains multiple
neural networks (typically 4) which makes the method highly sensitive
to the environment and hyperparameters, resulting in difficulty in
convergence. Therefore, the sub-agents are trained using the ‘‘Clip’’
optimization method of the PPO algorithm.
The task for the first-layer selector is to choose one or more sub-
agents given different security situations, such that the current defense
strategy yields the highest reward. This is a task with a relatively small
action space and a clear correspondence between the actions and re-
wards. Hence, the Q-Tabular algorithm is selected for training the selec-
tor. This algorithm is simple and efficient, and can also be accelerated
by incorporating expert knowledge to speed up convergence.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
9
Y. Tang et al.
Fig. 5. Network scenario.
5. Autonomous cyber defense use cases and simulation
5.1. Autonomous cyber defense use cases
This paper validates a HMARL autonomous network defense method
using a simulated environment. The Cyber Operations Research Gym
(CybORG) ( Cyber operations research gym , 2022a ), developed by
Maxwell Standen, provides a network security research environment
for training and developing autonomous agents. The CybORG tool gen-
erates a scenario based on pre-generated descriptions, initializes a set
of agents to perform roles in that scenario, and then implements their
actions and evaluates their effectiveness. We consider the following
advantages of this tool in establishing network attack and defense
scenarios. Firstly, in terms of the fidelity of cyberspace scenarios, this
toolkit uses cloud-based virtual machines for simulation and a gen-
eral interface for simulating network environments. Through a highly
modular design, scenarios modeled in finite state machines are highly
realistic. Secondly, in terms of the fidelity of network operations, this
toolkit defines simulated operation behaviors as state transitions, simu-
lating the execution effects of commands with appropriate parameters
in real scenarios.
5.1.1. Network attack and defense scenarios and attacker behavior patterns
This paper considers a general network service scenario as an au-
tonomous network defense use case, and the specific settings of the use
case are given in the related introduction of Cage Challenge 2 ( Cyber
autonomy gym for experimentation challenge 2 , 2022b). The network
framework is given in Fig. 5 , which divides the network into three
subnets. Hosts within a subnet can only communicate with hosts within
the same or adjacent subnets. Subnet 1 is composed of ordinary users,
which are non-critical user hosts. Subnet 2 is composed of enterprise
servers, which are the objects accessed by users in Subnet 1. Subnet
3 is composed of enterprise server management hosts, including key
operation servers and three user hosts. The network communication
process is mapped to discrete time states. In a discrete state, ordinary
users initiate normal business requests to enterprise servers, while at-
tackers and defenders select actions from their respective action sets to
operate the network. The execution order is: defender action, ordinary
user action, attacker action.
The attacker’s high-level attack action set is given in Table 3 , with
attack actions defined in accordance with the Adversarial Tactics, Tech-
niques, and Common Knowledge (ATT&CK) Technique definitions. This
high-level action is converted into specific parameters executed in the
network environment through the CybORG tool, such as low-level oper-
ation instructions for hosts and ports, thereby realizing simulated attack
behavior. The attacker’s modus operandi begins with using a user host
in subnet 1 as a foothold. The attacker establishes communication with
subnet 2 and uses the open port list obtained through the ‘‘Discover
Network Services’’ operation to determine which vulnerabilities are
available. In 75% of cases, the attacker will choose the highest-ranked
available vulnerability. In 25% of cases, one of the other available
vulnerabilities is chosen at random. After invading subnet 2, the at-
tacker will escalate privileges and maintains the session. Once they
have exploited a server in the enterprise network with the IP address
of the operating server, they can invade Subnet 3 and ultimately take
over the operating server through invasion means. The attacker’s goal
is to disrupt the service of the operating server for as long as possible
through the ‘‘impact’’ action, for which the attacker will attack the
operating server as directly as possible. The defender needs to prevent
the attacker’s behavior at each stage of the attack, discern whether the
communication is from the attacker or an ordinary user, and maintain
network functionality. Normal users only perform discovery operations
and do not perform destructive behavior on hosts. They prevent the
defender from thinking that all network activities are the work of the
attacker.
The following provides an ideal instance to illustrate the operation
process of the simulation environment. The defender can install moni-
toring tools on the host, collect and analyze event data, and determine
whether it is the malicious activity of the attacker or the normal activity
of a legitimate user. It can remove the attacker’s access permissions,
but this is only effective when the attacker’s permissions have not
been escalated, because once the attacker obtains system administrator
permissions, the defender will receive a negative reward. As long as
the attacker maintains administrator permissions, the defender will
continue to receive negative rewards. The defender can also restore
the system to a standard state to remove the attacker’s activities,
but this will destroy user data. Even after restoration, the attacker’s
initial foothold cannot be completely cleared, which is to ensure the
sustainability of the game and simulate the difficulty of clearing an
attacker who has obtained credentials in actual situations.
5.2. Simulation
Based on the use cases of network attack and defense scenarios in
the previous section, the following experiments are designed to verify
the performance of the HMARL autonomous network defense method.
Firstly, experiments were conducted on the bottom-up training process
and effect. Secondly, the decision-making performance of the top-down
defense strategy was evaluated. Finally, the agent’s defense strategy is
analyzed through the action distribution.
5.2.1. Experiment preparation
In Table 4 , the experimental setup parameters and hyperparame-
ters for each layer of the reinforcement learning model are provided.
With these basic conditions, training is conducted with each episode
consisting of 100 steps, and a total of 1000 episodes are trained,

--- PAGE 10 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
10
Y. Tang et al.
Table 3
Action space classification.
Type and ATT&CK technique Purpose
Discover Remote Systems
(ATT&CK Technique T1018)
Remote System Discovery. Discovers new hosts/IP addresses in the network
Discover Network Services
(ATT&CK Technique T1046)
Network Service Scanning. Discovers responsive services on a selected host by initiating a connection with that host.
Exploit Network Services
(ATT&CK Technique T1210)
Exploitation of Remote Services. This action attempts to exploit a specified service on a remote system.
Escalate
(ATT&CK Tactic TA0004)
Privilege Escalation. This action escalates the privilege of attacker on the host.
Impact
(ATT&CK Technique T1489)
Service Stop. This action disrupts the performance of the network
Table 4
Experimental hyperparameter settings.
Entries Parameters
Hardware
CPU AMD EPYC 7T83 64-Core 2.45 GHz
GPU NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 24 GB
RAM 512 GB
Disk 1 TB
Software
OS Ubuntu 22.04.4 jammy LTS x86_64
Python 3.9.17
Pytorch 2.1.2
PPO Algorithm
Number of layers for actor network: 3
Number of layers for critic network: 3
Number of nodes for actor layers: (62, 64, 32)
Number of nodes for critic layers: (62, 64, 1)
Actor network active function: (ReLU, ReLU, Softmax)
Critic network active function: (ReLU, ReLU)
Learning rates: 0.02
Replay buffer size, batch size: 100000, 512
Maximal episode, steps per episode: 1000, 100
Episode clip: 0.2
Reward
Attacker access User Hosts: −0.1
Attacker access Enterprise Servers: −1
Attacker access Operational Server: −1
Attacker access Operational Hosts: −0.1
The cost of decoy behavior, Maximum number of uses:
−0.05, 15%Maxstep
The cost of restore action: −1
The cost of remove action: −0.01
The cost of sleep action: 0
The cost of perceive action: −0.001
taking approximately 15 h. Among the hyperparameters, the design of
rewards is worth discussing. On one hand, the value of server resources
is much higher than that of hosts. On the other hand, the restore
action consumes the most defense resources, the decoy action has usage
limitations, and the perceive action is a cost-effective and efficient
defense method. Based on these considerations, the following reward
hyperparameters are designed.
5.2.2. Training of different agents and overall training status
The bottom-up training process is the fundamental training ap-
proach in hierarchical reinforcement learning. In this paper, the decoy
agent and recover agent are first trained individually, followed by
training the overall model using hierarchical reinforcement learning.
To incorporate the functionality of perceiving the safety situation,
the perceive action is trained in conjunction with both types of agents
during the training process. The most valuable part of the defense
strategy lies in the game played against the attack behavior. The sleep
action, which simply skips a game round, is a straightforward operation
and is not discussed further in this context.
In Figs. 6, we present important data regarding the training of
the hierarchical reinforcement learning model. In (a), we provide the
reward statistics during the training process. Overall, it can be observed
that the defense capability of the individual agents is inferior to that of
the collaborative defense by multiple agents. When comparing the sub-
agents, the recover agent has a more complex action space compared
to the decoy agent, resulting in faster convergence for the decoy agent.
In Figs. 6(b), the Policy Loss of the two types of agents trained using
the PPO algorithm is shown. The slightly slower convergence of the
decoy agent’s policy loss compared to the recover agent’s supports the
observations made in (a).
In Figs. 6(c), the number of steps per episode is described. In (d)
and (e), the accumulation of rewards per episode is illustrated for
the case of 100 steps per episode. It can be seen that the majority
of rewards are concentrated, with only some dispersion in the initial
training phase. This indicates that the formation process of defense
strategies is relatively stable, and the agents explore various situations
during the initial evolution of the game.
5.2.3. Agent defense capability assessment
After the hierarchical reinforcement learning agents form collabo-
rative defense strategies, the paper conducts strategy evaluation and
analysis. The capabilities of the defense agents trained through rein-
forcement learning are demonstrated based on two aspects: the distri-
bution of autonomously formed defense strategies and the stability of
the strategies.
The stability of the strategy can to some extent reflect the ef-
fectiveness of the method proposed in this paper when applied to
different attack scenarios. In more complex attack scenarios, such as
zero-day vulnerabilities, advanced persistent threats (APTs), and supply
chain attacks, although the attack methods and techniques may vary,
from a defensive perspective, the attack process generally involves
reconnaissance, vulnerability exploitation, lateral movement, impact,
and exfiltration. In other words, the increasing complexity of attack
methods better conceals the attacker’s intentions, but does not change
the essential process of the attack. The core destructive effect of the at-
tack occurs during the impact phase. By coordinating multiple defense
measures to formulate defense strategies from the perspective of the
‘‘process’’, it is possible to detect malicious behaviors before the attack
occurs and then implement security policies to prevent the attack. Even
when an attack has occurred and caused damage, appropriate security
policies can be implemented to achieve resilient defense.
To evaluate the strategies, the trained agents, initially trained with
100 steps per episode, are placed in scenarios with 200 steps and 300
steps per episode. The evaluation results of 1000 episodes are presented
in Fig. 7. Additionally, Table 5 provides data statistics analysis for the
three scenarios.
In Fig. 7, it can be observed that as the number of steps increases
by 100, the reward fluctuation also increases. However, the incre-
mental consumption of defense resources remains relatively constant.
Table 5 provides statistics showing that the increase in defense resource
consumption is approximately 15 units of reward, with a standard
deviation increase of around 3 units.
These data reflect two key points. First, as the temporal dimension
of the game process increases, the complexity of the game space
also increases, leading to increased instability in the strategies. These
three factors are positively correlated, highlighting the importance

--- PAGE 11 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
11
Y. Tang et al.
Fig. 6. Defense resource consumption in attack-defense games of different lengths.
Fig. 7. Defense resource consumption for offensive and defensive games of different
lengths.
of constructing autonomous defense decision-making capabilities in
cyberspace.
Second, the consistent incremental consumption of defense re-
sources indicates the effectiveness of the hierarchical reinforcement
learning method in constructing autonomous network defense strate-
gies. The defense strategies formed have the ability to maintain a
linear time span of elastic defense with linearly growing resource
consumption, which is challenging for human experts to achieve.
The almost unchanged standard deviation increment demonstrates the
relative stability of autonomous network defense strategies even in the
face of increased complexity in the game space.
Some interesting conclusions are shown in the relevant results of
competitions with some literature and related toolkits related to this
article. We have selected some control data given in Table 6 .
To align the test environment of this article and ensure variable
control, the results given in the table are the same as the simulation
environment and evaluation methods of this article. The data of CCS
and CardiffUni are from the official data of the TTCP CAGE Challenge
2 competition, and Wiebe’s results are from the literature (Wiebe et al.,
2023).
The data of CCS is a baseline test for this simulation environment,
and four types of tests have been done on the environment. Firstly,
it is the impact on the network environment by the attacker in the
absence of a defender. Secondly, the defense effect of executing defense
measures with a random defense strategy. Thirdly, the result of using
a simple rule defense agent, specifically, the result of executing restore
immediately upon detecting a change in host permissions. Fourthly,
the evaluation using the standard single-agent PPO algorithm. For the
simulation environment, the attacker’s attack strategy can cause serious
damage to network facilities. For the defender, the intelligence level of
the defense strategy is absolutely key to the defense effect. CardiffUni
is the champion team in the TTCP CAGE Challenge 2 competition. The
important reason for their solution to achieve such excellent results
is the manual analysis of the decoy placement action strategy. This
effort shows that for reinforcement learning methods, the overly large
strategy search space is still a huge challenge for the learning ability of
the agent. Pruning the action space manually and giving some deter-
ministic experiences in the initialization stage can help form intelligent
strategies. Their specific exploration steps are open on github. 1 Wiebe
and others have given a solution of multi-agent reinforcement learning.
The authors respectively apply the independent Q-learning (Tan, 1993)
algorithm and QMIX algorithm ( Rashid et al. , 2020 ) to discuss the
problem of network defense strategy generation. From the experimental
1 https://github.com/john-cardiff/-cyborg-cage-2

--- PAGE 12 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
12
Y. Tang et al.
Table 5
Results statistics of attack-defense games of different lengths.
Game length (steps) Mean Standard deviation Mean value change Standard deviation change
100 −16.5752 4.027 −0 +0
200 −31.7533 7.014 −15.1781 +2.987
300 −47.0622 9.785 −15.3089 +2.771
Table 6
Comparison of related work.
Name Method Grades Clarification
CCS (Cyber autonomy gym for experimentation challenge 2, 2022b)
Sleeper −1134.03 Do nothing
Random −726.92 Random defender agent
Heuristic −184.34 Defender react restore
PPO −30.19 RL Benchmark
CardiffUni (Cyber autonomy gym for experimentation challenge 2, 2022b) PPO + Greedy Decoys −13.76 Intervention for Deploying Decoys
Wiebe (Wiebe et al., 2023)
IQL −18.17 ± 3.86 No communication
QMIX −16.75 ± 3.48 Implicit communication
Heuristic −31.9 ± 20.73 Rule based
Our paper Our method −16.6 ± 4.027 Task breakdown
results they gave, the multi-agent cooperation method is better able
to solve complex decision problems, although QMIX is an implicit
multi-agent cooperation method.
Compared with the above work, the method in this article is al-
most the same as the best performance in defense performance, but
the method in this article has two advantages. Firstly, all the above
work is discussing the problem of strategy generation in the field of
reinforcement learning, and the interpretability of the strategy gen-
eration process is not high. This article uses the game framework
to qualitatively and quantitatively model network attack and defense
conflicts, providing an interpretive framework for reinforcement learn-
ing methods to iterate defense strategies. Secondly, this article uses
hierarchical reinforcement learning methods to decouple the defense
decision problem, reduce the dimension of the complex defense action
space, agree on explicit cooperation constraints, and fully demonstrate
the cooperative defense behavior of multiple agents.
5.2.4. Analysis of agent defense strategies
Based on the evaluation data of the agents, the paper conducts the
following analysis of the distribution of agent strategies. The actions
of both attack and defense strategies are categorized and statistically
analyzed according to their types. The statistical results are presented
in Figs. 8, where (a) and (b) represent the distribution of actions for
the defender and attacker, respectively, under 100 steps, while (c) and
(d) represent the distribution of actions for the defender and attacker,
respectively, under 200 steps.
By comparing Figs. 8(a) and (b) with (c) and (d) vertically, we
can confirm that the increase in the temporal dimension of the game
space does not affect the stability of autonomous defense strategies. The
distribution patterns of (a) and (c) are similar. Through the horizontal
comparison of (a) and (c) with (b) and (d), it confirms the stability of
the Stackelberg equilibrium in the game model framework. This reflects
that if there is no change in the attack strategy, the optimal solution for
defense response actions remains stable.
Through detailed analysis of Figs. 8(a) and (c), we can infer that de-
fense strategies are complex mixed strategies. The distribution of Scan,
Analyse, and Remove actions is relatively evenly spread, indicating
that the defense agent effectively utilizes these defense behaviors. The
concentrated distribution and smaller statistical values of Decoy and
Restore actions suggest that our adjustment of reward hyperparameters
has been incorporated into the defense agent’s strategic considerations.
From the relevant results shown in Figs. 8, we can conclude that
by increasing the length of the attack-defense interaction, our model’s
defense strategy demonstrates excellent statistical stability in its strat-
egy profile. Therefore, we select one evaluation episode to analyze the
consumption of defense resources. We extract the results of one episode
of a 100-step scenario and analyze the resource consumption in the face
of different types of attack techniques. The statistical results are given
in Fig. 9.
Fig. 9 shows the actions taken by the attacker and defender re-
spectively in the 100 steps, which is a statistical cross-section of the
attack-defense resource consumption. Combined with specific infor-
mation, the attacker enters the attack-defense simulation environment
using ‘‘Discover Remote System’’, uses 7 steps of action resources
to complete the detection of the network, and makes 77 malicious
connections to the hosts and server resources in the network. Out of
the 77 malicious connections, the ‘‘Exploit Remote Services’’ behavior
succeeded in breaking through 15 times, and executed the ‘‘Escalate’’
action 15 times. In response to the above attack strategy, the defense
agent triggered 11 analysis actions, which are mainly used to deter-
mine the source of the attack, and executed 13 decoy deployments,
protecting important service resources in the system. The defense agent
also learned to deploy decoy resources in advance when the attacker
just entered the network environment and did not carry out effective
attacks. It is worth noting that out of the 77 malicious connections,
62 were stopped by the ‘‘Remove’’ operation in the attempt stage, and
the 15 successful breakthroughs were responded to by 14 ‘‘Restore’’
actions, that is, the 77 attack attempts were perceived and responded
to by the defender 76 times.
6. Conclusion
In response to the inefficiency of human expert network security
strategy organization and the difficulty of intelligent defense decision-
making in complex environments, we propose an innovative HMARL
framework for autonomously and efficiently formulating network se-
curity strategies and defense behavior decisions. This framework in-
tegrates game theory and hierarchical reinforcement learning theory.
Firstly, it establishes a SHM of cyberspace conflict, describing the
multi-level dynamic defense collaborative response mechanism under
incomplete information. Secondly, through multi-agent reinforcement
learning to simulate the game evolution dynamics process, it sequen-
tially solves the Nash equilibrium to obtain dynamic autonomous de-
fense strategies. Finally, using the hierarchical reinforcement learning
paradigm, the defense decision problem is decoupled, significantly
reducing the difficulty of exploration and efficiently learning collabora-
tive defense strategies. This method not only enhances the automation
and efficiency of defense strategy formulation, meeting the needs of
real-time decision-making, but also enhances the adaptability to com-
plex and changing network environments. We lay the theoretical and
technical foundation for building an autonomous intelligent network

--- PAGE 13 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
13
Y. Tang et al.
Fig. 8. Action distribution statistics in attack and defense strategies.
Fig. 9. Resource consumption in attack-defense interaction.
security defense system, which will promote the development of net-
work security towards autonomous intelligence and strengthen the
active defense capability of cyberspace.
The HMARL framework proposed in this paper is an efficient au-
tonomous control and optimization method, particularly suitable for
scenarios with adversarial interactions. Many cybersecurity scenarios
can be abstracted into such characteristics, and it is foreseeable that
applying this framework to the software vulnerability management
domain can achieve autonomous vulnerability discovery, analysis, as-
sessment, and tracking during security penetration testing. More im-
portantly, its continuous feedback control feature can well adapt to the
vulnerability management throughout the software lifecycle. Further-
more, extending this framework to the data privacy protection domain
can enable a collaborative data protection mechanism among multi-
ple users. Users can collaboratively formulate data sharing protocols,
control data aggregation and linking processes, and strike a balance
between preventing data leakage and maximizing the richness of the
data set.
7. Limitations and future work
Based on the above theoretical modeling and model evaluation
work, although we have applied new methods to discuss the problem of
autonomous network defense strategy generation, it is inevitable that
there are still the following limitations in this article: In terms of attack-
defense game modeling, firstly, the model construction in this article
is based on a series of assumptions, but the real cyberspace conflict
does not conform to such perfect mathematical characteristics in the

--- PAGE 14 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
14
Y. Tang et al.
quantification process, such as it is difficult to characterize man-made
accidental factors; secondly, the game iteration process in this article
is based on a rational exploration process, but real network attack
methods are not all explicitly rational and interpretable, for example,
the action sequence relationship of advanced persistent threat is not
easy to be captured, and for another example, denial of service (DoS)
attack is a violent destruction of the system.
In terms of applying multi-agent reinforcement learning methods
in the security field, firstly, this article discusses the feasibility and
effectiveness of exploring the generation of artificial intelligence au-
tonomous network defense strategies in an ideal simulation environ-
ment, and expands the application range and potential application
scenarios of artificial intelligence network autonomous operation ca-
pabilities. However, it needs to be calmly faced that applying such
methods in real network environments still needs to overcome many
problems, such as: the construction of the world model, the reasonable
design of the general-purpose reward function, and how to efficiently
converge in the complex action space; secondly, the method in this
article is limited to generating security strategies and real-time pro-
tection for general attack behaviors, and lacks discussion on specific
attack types and the security of the model itself; finally, the scale of
the model in this article is not large, but the relationship between
the consumption of computing resources and the improvement of the
model’s general-purpose ability makes the model less practical.
Based on the above various limitations and the coherence of our re-
search direction, In terms of cross-application of cutting-edge technolo-
gies, on the one hand, we will explore the application of interpretable
multi-agent reinforcement learning in the field of network security,
making AI-based autonomous network defense methods more reliable
and easier to be understood by human experts, to achieve intelligent
and artificial collaboration, and intelligent assistance in generating and
implementing security policies. On the other hand, we will combine
the cutting-edge advanced reinforcement learning methods with other
directions in the field of network security, especially the security issues
of distributed machine learning model and training, specifically the se-
curity discussion in the field of federated learning. In terms of exploring
the limitations of the underlying theory, game theory is an impor-
tant mathematical tool for analyzing conflicts in cyberspace security.
However, its application to analyzing network security issues involves
many assumed premises. Exploring new methods to break through
these assumptions, and enable deeper discussion and representation of
conflicts in cyberspace, is one of the future research work.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yunlong Tang: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investiga-
tion. Jing Sun: Supervision, Investigation. Huan Wang: Writing –
review & editing, Resources, Project administration. Junyi Deng: Data
curation, Conceptualization. Liang Tong: Investigation, Formal analy-
sis. Wenhong Xu: Software, Data curation.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62106053, in part by the Natu-
ral Science Foundation of Guangxi Province of China under Grant
2024GXNSFAA010242, in part by the Innovation Project of Guangxi
Graduate Education under Grant YCSW2023478, in part by the Doc-
toral Fund of Guangxi University of Science and Technology under
Grant XiaoKe Bo19Z33.
References
Adawadkar, A.M.K., Kulkarni, N., 2022. Cyber-security and reinforcement learning—A
brief survey. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 114, 105116.
Alshamrani, A., Alshahrani, A., 2023. Adaptive cyber defense technique based on
multiagent reinforcement learning strategies. Intell. Autom. Soft Comput. 36 (3).
Anjum, I., Miah, M.S., Zhu, M., Sharmin, N., Kiekintveld, C., Enck, W., Singh, M.P.,
2020. Optimizing vulnerability-driven honey traffic using game theory. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.09069.
Applebaum, A., Dennler, C., Dwyer, P., Moskowitz, M., Nguyen, H., Nichols, N.,
Park, N., Rachwalski, P., Rau, F., Webster, A., et al., 2022. Bridging automated
to autonomous cyber defense: Foundational analysis of tabular q-learning. In:
Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security.
pp. 149–159.
Apruzzese, G., Andreolini, M., Marchetti, M., Venturi, A., Colajanni, M., 2020. Deep
reinforcement adversarial learning against botnet evasion attacks. IEEE Trans.
Netw. Serv. Manag. 17 (4), 1975–1987.
Bakker, C., Bhattacharya, A., Chatterjee, S., Vrabie, D.L., 2020. Hypergames and
cyber-physical security for control systems. ACM Trans. Cyber-Phys. Syst. 4 (4),
1–41.
Bilinski, M., Ferguson-Walter, K., Fugate, S., Gabrys, R., Mauger, J., Souza, B., 2019.
You only lie twice: A multi-round cyber deception game of questionable veracity.
In: International Conference on Decision and Game Theory for Security. Springer,
pp. 65–84.
Cardellini, V., Casalicchio, E., Iannucci, S., Lucantonio, M., Mittal, S., Panigrahi, D.,
Silvi, A., 2022. Irs-partition: An intrusion response system utilizing deep Q-networks
and system partitions. SoftwareX 19, 101120.
Carmona, G., 2012. Existence and stability of Nash equilibrium. World scientific.
Cheah, M., Stone, J., Haubrick, P., Bailey, S., Rimmer, D., Till, D., Lacey, M.,
Kruczynska, J., Dorn, M., 2023. CO-DECYBER: Co-operative decision making
for cybersecurity using deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: European
Symposium on Research in Computer Security. Springer, pp. 628–643.
Chen, L., Leneutre, J., 2009. A game theoretical framework on intrusion detection in
heterogeneous networks. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 4 (2), 165–178.
Cheng, Z., Chen, G., Hong, Y., 2022. Single-leader-multiple-followers stackelberg
security game with hypergame framework. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 17,
954–969.
Cyber autonomy gym for experimentation challenge 2, 2022b. https://github.com/cage-
challenge/cage-challenge-2, 2022. Created by Maxwell Standen, David Bowman,
Son Hoang, Toby Richer, Martin Lucas, Richard Van Tassel, Phillip Vu, Mitchell
Kiely.
Cyber operations research gym, 2022a. https://github.com/cage-challenge/CybORG,
2022. Created by Maxwell Standen, David Bowman, Son Hoang, Toby Richer,
Martin, 2022. Lucas, Richard Van Tassel, Phillip Vu, Mitchell Kiely, KC C., Natalie
Konschnik, Joshua Collyer.
Du, Y., Song, Z., Milani, S., Gonzales, C., Fang, F., 2022. Learning to play an
adaptive cyber deception game. In: Proc. of the 21st International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, vol. 6, Auckland, New Zealand.
Elderman, R., Pater, L.J., Thie, A.S., Drugan, M.M., Wiering, M.A., 2017. Adversarial
reinforcement learning in a cyber security simulation. In: 9th International Confer-
ence on Agents and Artificial Intelligence. ICAART 2017, SciTePress Digital Library,
pp. 559–566.
Guide, A.H., 2006. Infinite dimensional analysis. Springer.
Hammar, K., Stadler, R., 2021. Learning intrusion prevention policies through opti-
mal stopping. In: 2021 17th International Conference on Network and Service
Management. CNSM, IEEE, pp. 509–517.
Hu, P., Li, H., Fu, H., Cansever, D., Mohapatra, P., 2015. Dynamic defense strategy
against advanced persistent threat with insiders. In: 2015 IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications. INFOCOM, IEEE, Kowloon, Hong Kong, pp. 747–755.
Huang, Y., Chen, J., Huang, L., Zhu, Q., 2020. Dynamic games for secure and resilient
control system design. Natl. Sci. Rev. 7 (7), 1125–1141.
Huang, S., Zhang, H., Wang, J., Huang, J., 2018. Markov differential game for network
defense decision-making method. IEEE Access 6, 39621–39634.
Huang, L., Zhu, Q., 2020. A dynamic games approach to proactive defense strategies
against advanced persistent threats in cyber-physical systems. Comput. Secur. 89,
101660.
Jin, Q., Wang, L., 2020. Zero-trust based distributed collaborative dynamic access
control scheme with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. EAI Endorsed Trans.
Secur. Saf. 8 (27).
Khouzani, M., Liu, Z., Malacaria, P., 2019. Scalable min-max multi-objective cyber-
security optimisation over probabilistic attack graphs. European J. Oper. Res. 278
(3), 894–903.
Kong, G., Chen, F., Yang, X., Cheng, G., Zhang, S., He, W., 2023. Optimal deception
asset deployment in cybersecurity: A Nash Q-learning approach in multi-agent
stochastic games. Appl. Sci. 14 (1), 357.
Kovach, N.S., Gibson, A.S., Lamont, G.B., 2015. Hypergame theory: a model for conflict,
misperception, and deception. Game Theory 2015.
Li, X., Hu, X., Jiang, T., 2023. Dual reinforcement learning based attack path prediction
for 5g industrial cyber-physical systems. IEEE Internet Things J..

--- PAGE 15 ---
Computers & Security 142 (2024) 103871
15
Y. Tang et al.
Li, T., Zhu, K., Luong, N.C., Niyato, D., Wu, Q., Zhang, Y., Chen, B., 2022. Applications
of multi-agent reinforcement learning in future internet: A comprehensive survey.
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 24 (2), 1240–1279.
Liang, X., Xiao, Y., 2012. Game theory for network security. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor.
15 (1), 472–486.
Liu, Z., Yin, X., Hu, Y., 2020. CPSS LR-ddos detection and defense in edge computing
utilizing dcnn Q-learning. IEEE Access 8, 42120–42130.
Liu, L., Zhang, L., Liao, S., Liu, J., Wang, Z., 2021. A generalized approach to solve
perfect Bayesian Nash equilibrium for practical network attack and defense. Inform.
Sci. 577, 245–264.
Milani, S., Shen, W., Chan, K.S., Venkatesan, S., Leslie, N.O., Kamhoua, C., Fang, F.,
2020. Harnessing the power of deception in attack graph-based security games. In:
Decision and Game Theory for Security: 11th International Conference, GameSec
2020, College Park, MD, USA, October 28–30, 2020, Proceedings 11. Springer, pp.
147–167.
Nguyen, T.T., Reddi, V.J., 2023. Deep reinforcement learning for cyber security. IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 34 (8), 3779–3795.
Nguyen, T., Xu, H., 2019. Imitative attacker deception in stackelberg security games.
In: IJCAI. pp. 528–534.
Rashid, T., Samvelyan, M., De Witt, C.S., Farquhar, G., Foerster, J., Whiteson, S., 2020.
Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning.
J. Mach. Learn. Res. 21 (178), 1–51.
Saeed, I.A., Selamat, A., Rohani, M.F., Krejcar, O., Chaudhry, J.A., 2020. A system-
atic state-of-the-art analysis of multi-agent intrusion detection. IEEE Access 8,
180184–180209.
Schlenker, A., Thakoor, O., Xu, H., Fang, F., Tambe, M., Tran-Thanh, L., Vayanos, P.,
Vorobeychik, Y., 2018. Deceiving cyber adversaries: A game theoretic approach.
In: AAMAS’18: Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and MultiAgent Systems. IFAAMAS, pp. 892–900.
Sengupta, S., Kambhampati, S., 2020. Multi-agent reinforcement learning in bayesian
stackelberg markov games for adaptive moving target defense. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.10457.
Shi, W., Li, J., Wu, H., Zhou, C., Cheng, N., Shen, X., 2020. Drone-cell trajectory
planning and resource allocation for highly mobile networks: A hierarchical DRL
approach. IEEE Internet Things J. 8 (12), 9800–9813.
Tan, M., 1993. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents.
In: Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Machine Learning. pp.
330–337.
Tran, K., Akella, A., Standen, M., Kim, J., Bowman, D., Richer, T., Lin, C.-T., 2021.
Deep hierarchical reinforcement agents for automated penetration testing. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2109.06449.
Wang, S., Pei, Q., Wang, J., Tang, G., Zhang, Y., Liu, X., 2020. An intelligent
deployment policy for deception resources based on reinforcement learning. IEEE
Access 8, 35792–35804.
Waniek, M., Michalak, T.P., Alshamsi, A., 2019. Strategic attack & defense in security
diffusion games. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 11 (1), 1–35.
Wiebe, J., Mallah, R.A., Li, L., 2023. Learning cyber defence tactics from scratch with
multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05939.
Xu, X., Hu, H., Liu, Y., Tan, J., Zhang, H., Song, H., 2022. Moving target defense
of routing randomization with deep reinforcement learning against eavesdropping
attack. Digit. Commun. Netw. 8 (3), 373–387.
Zhan, Z., Xu, M., Xu, S., 2013. Characterizing honeypot-captured cyber attacks:
Statistical framework and case study. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 8 (11),
1775–1789.
Zhang, Y., Malacaria, P., 2021. Bayesian Stackelberg games for cyber-security decision
support. Decis. Support Syst. 148, 113599.
Zhang, H., Wang, J., Yu, D., Han, J., Li, T., 2015. Active defense strategy selection
based on static Bayesian game. In: Third International Conference on Cyberspace
Technology. CCT 2015, IET, pp. 1–7.
Zhong, F., Hu, P., Zhang, G., Li, H., Cheng, X., 2022. Reinforcement learning based
adversarial malware example generation against black-box detectors. Comput.
Secur. 121, 102869.
Zhu, M., Anwar, A.H., Wan, Z., Cho, J.-H., Kamhoua, C.A., Singh, M.P., 2021. A survey
of defensive deception: Approaches using game theory and machine learning. IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutor. 23 (4), 2460–2493.
Zhu, Q., Rass, S., 2018. Game theory meets network security: A tutorial. In: Proceedings
of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security.
pp. 2163–2165.
Zolotukhin, M., Kumar, S., Hämäläinen, T., 2020. Reinforcement learning for attack
mitigation in SDN-enabled networks. In: 2020 6th IEEE Conference on Network
Softwarization. NetSoft, IEEE, pp. 282–286.