
--- PAGE 1 ---
ACD-G: Enhancing Autonomous Cyber Defense Agent Generalization Through
Graph Embedded Network Representation
Josh Collyer 1 Alex Andrew 1 Duncan Hodges 2
Abstract
The adoption of autonomous cyber defense agents
within real-world contexts requires them to be
able to cope with differences between their train-
ing and target environments, bridging the simu-
lation to real gap to provide robust, generalized
defensive responses. Whilst the simulation to
real gap has been studied in-depth across domains
such as robotics, to date there has been minimal
research considering generalizability in the con-
text of cyber defense agents and how differences
in observation space could enhance agent gen-
eralizability when placed into environments that
differ from the training environment. Within this
paper, we propose a method of enhancing agent
generalizability and performance within unseen
environments by integrating a graph embedded
network representation into the agent’s observa-
tion space. We then compare agent performance
with and without a graph embedded network rep-
resentation based observation space within a se-
ries of randomized cyber defense simulations. We
ﬁnd that there is a trade-off between the effec-
tiveness of the graph embedding representation
and the complexity of the graph, in terms of node
count and number of edges.
1. Introduction
AI-based cyber-attacks are no longer science ﬁction and
have been fuelled by the recent advances in artiﬁcial intel-
ligence technologies (Kaloudi & Li, 2020) with a growing
body of work exploring areas such as autonomous penetra-
tion testing (Chaudhary et al., 2020; Chowdhary et al., 2020;
Tran et al., 2021). These works have driven the research and
1Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) 2Defence
Academy, Cranﬁeld University. Correspondence to: Joshua Col-
lyer <jcollyer@dstl.gov.uk>.
Presented at the Workshop on Machine Learning for Cybersecurity
(ML4Cyber) as part of the Proceedings of the 39 th International
Conference on Machine Learning , Baltimore, Maryland, USA,
PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
development of autonomous cyber defense systems which
are able to respond in a relevant timescale and at a sufﬁcient
scale. Modern networks however are non-heterogeneous
and dynamic with new application deployment paradigms
such as serverless and containerisation becoming common
place alongside standard server deployments. This raises
challenges when trying to train and deploy decision mak-
ing agents due to the high likelihood of differences being
present between the training and target environments. This
problem, typically referred to as the ‘simulation to reality
gap’, is not something that is unique to a cyber defense set-
ting and has been researched heavily within contexts such as
robotics (Zhao et al. , 2020) and autonomous driving ( Balaji
et al., 2020). To date however, generalizability has not been
a speciﬁc consideration within the autonomous cyber de-
fense literature with a limited number of papers discussing
it as a key barrier to real-world deployment.
Current state of the art approaches towards autonomous
cyber defense have typically been focused on proving the
feasibility of agents in a range of settings; such as Industrial
Control Systems (ICS) ( Mern et al. , 2021) and Software
Deﬁned Networks (SDN) ( Akbari et al. , 2020). In addi-
tion, a signiﬁcant body of work exists that has considered
speciﬁc problem formulations such as; Optimal Stopping
for Intrusion Prevention (
Hammar & Stadler , 2021), au-
tonomous network defender performance when faced with
adversarial perturbations ( Molina-Markham et al. , 2021),
as well as several works which have developed ﬂexible
and re-usable agent training environments ( Li et al., 2021;
Standen et al., 2021; Microsoft Defender Research Team.,
2021). This extensive body of work demonstrates the ap-
petite for autonomous cyber defense agents, yet we still do
not fully understand how to increase the generalizability of
autonomous defense agents.
Generalizability and the ability to transfer an agent from
its training environment to unseen environments is likely to
be key for the real-world adoption of autonomous cyber de-
fense agents. This is a complex problem to tackle, given that
the cyber security domain is both complex and adversarial
in nature ( Kott et al., 2016). Cyber environments are non-
stationary by their very nature, which is a known challenge
for Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches ( Igl et al. ,

--- PAGE 2 ---
ACD-G: Enhancing Autonomous Cyber Defense Agent Generalization Through Graph Embedded Network Representation
2020). Several works propose approaches to tackle this
problem such as introducing data augmentation ( Kostrikov
et al. , 2020) or a representational learning step ( Agarwal
et al., 2021) to enhance the agents observation space and in-
crease agent performance. Unfortunately, the vast majority
of these approaches are image based and therefore are not
directly transferable to a cyber security setting. Evidence
does however suggest that graphs are ideal representations
of computer networks ( Dawood, 2014) and this is further
reinforced with several works using graphs as the underly-
ing representation of RL training simulations ( Ridley, 2018;
Microsoft Defender Research Team., 2021). We am to build
upon this previous body of work by exploiting the graph
representation and supply it as an input into autonomous
agents as a means of providing a map or diagram of the
network to be defended.
In this paper, we investigate the relationship between agent
performance and the composition of an agent’s observation
space, using unseen environments that are structurally dif-
ferent from the training environment. The agent is placed
within an intrusion response setting across a three differ-
ent environment sizes. The agent’s objective is to prevent
a stochastic attacker from compromising the whole of the
network with the reward function favoring minimisation
of compromise. A stochastic attacker was chosen over a
deterministic attacker in order to provide an abstract rep-
resentation of different attackers across episodes and to
ensure the behavior was diverse across training and evalua-
tion. We formulate two observation space conditions; one
which incorporates an adjacency matrix representation of
the network to be defended, and another which incorporates
a graph embedded network representation. We then train
two sets of agents each with a different network representa-
tion as part of their observation space within a static training
environment for ﬁve million training timesteps, before com-
paring agent performance within a series of randomized
evaluation environments.
We ﬁnd that whilst agents under both observation space
conditions exhibit similar training time performance, the
agents that observe an embedded network representation
perform signiﬁcantly better in unseen 20 node environments
whilst performing similarly or worse in both the 10 and
40 node environments. This empirical evidence suggests
that there is a trade-off between the environments network
complexity and the effect of exploiting the graph structure
inherent of cyber security environments.
The remainder of this work has the following structure.
§Section 2 describes the methods used to generate the empir-
ical results, covering aspects such as the agent’s observation
space and action space, training and evaluation protocols
and metrics collected. The experimental results are then
presented in § Section 3 before ﬁnishing with § Section 4 de-
scribing the key conclusions and then § Section 5 detailing
potential future work directions.
2. Methods
2.1. Simulation Environment
A custom, highly abstract, ﬂexible training environment
called Y AWNING TITAN (henceforth YT) was developed
to provide a means of training autonomous cyber defense
agents
1. YT is an OpenAI Gym ( Brockman et al. , 2016)
based simulation which can represent a range of cyber sce-
narios, such as intrusion response and crown jewels defense.
As the simulation is OpenAI compatible, it provides a means
of seamless experimentation with open source RL algorithm
libraries such as Stable Baselines 3 ( Rafﬁn et al., 2021).
Each scenario within this environment is composed of two
components. The ﬁrst is an undirected graph G = ( V, E)
where V is a set of vertices and E is a set of edges. Each
vertex represents a computing device within the computer
network and each edge represents a connection between
computing devices. This undirected graph G represents the
network that is going to be defended by the autonomous
cyber defender. The second is a conﬁguration ﬁle which
contains a range of parameters used for the simulation envi-
ronment. This provides a means of ﬁne grained control of
key aspects of the simulation, such as what actions form the
defending agents action space, what reward function should
be used and how many time-steps each episode should be
(Sutton & Barto, 2018).
2.2. Scenario Initialization
For the purposes of this work, three environment sizes were
chosen, 10 nodes, 20 nodes and 40 nodes respectively. This
range was chosen primarily to provide a means of deter-
mining the effectiveness of the graph based observation
space as well as providing the agents with an incrementally
increasing challenge. The undirected graphs for all three
environment sizes were generated using an amended Erd ˝os-
R´enyi (Paul & Alfr ´ed, 1959) graph generator which begins
by creating a random graph with n nodes and an edge proba-
bility value of p. Once created, the amended generator then
checks that every vertex within the graph has at least one
edge and for those vertices without edges, randomly creates
an edge. This ensures that there are no vertices without any
edges. This is important because if any vertex is inaccessible
and the lose criteria for the blue agent is total compromise,
the red agent would be unable to compromise nodes with no
edges and therefore, the blue agent would win consistently.
A selection of sample graphs can be seen in Fig. 1 . The
edge probability value p was ﬁxed throughout all of the ex-
1Y AWNING TITAN is available at: https://github.
com/dstl/YAWNING-TITAN

--- PAGE 3 ---
ACD-G: Enhancing Autonomous Cyber Defense Agent Generalization Through Graph Embedded Network Representation
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
(a) 10 Node
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19 (b) 20 Node
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39 (c) 40 Node
Figure 1. Example Simulated Network Topologies
periments outlined within this paper to p = 0.1. This value
was chosen to balance between having a sufﬁcient number
of edges present within each environment graph while also
ensuring that every node was not connected to every other
node, creating highly connected, dense graphs.
During training, a single YT scenario was created at the
beginning of training and then used as the environment
for the training duration. However during evaluation we
use a collection of different YT scenarios created as eval-
uation environments. The only variable change between
the evaluation environment initialization and training envi-
ronment initialization was the underlying topology of the
graphs. This provided a means of creating unseen environ-
ments, ensuring that if there were differences between both
observation space conditions, it could be attributed to the
observation space and not other parameter changes.
Each vertex of the graph has two attributes. The ﬁrst is a
node vulnerability score nv ∈ R : nv ∈ [l, u], where l and
u denote the vulnerability score lower and upper bounds.
This is deﬁned in the scenarios conﬁguration as described
in Section 2.2 . This can be considered a highly abstract
representation of the number of vulnerabilities a computing
device currently has, and is used as an attack multiplier
by the attacking agent. The second attribute
c denotes the
binary compromised status where
c =
{
uncompromised, if c = 0,
compromised, if c = 1.
At the beginning of an episode all vertices are set to c = 0,
denoting uncompromised status. The node vulnerability
score for each vertex is sampled uniformly from
nv ∼
U [l, u], where l and u are the lower and upper bounds. In
addition to these two steps, an entry node is selected and
Table 1. Blue Agent Action Descriptions
Action Description
patch Reduces the vulnerability score of the targeted
node by 0.2
recover Recovers a compromised node to its initial
state at the beginning of the episode
noop Performs no operation - effectively skipping a
turn
acts as the red agent’s primary route into the network. This
entry node can be viewed as an externally facing device
which is the initial target for compromise.
Once the environment is created, one blue, defending agent
and one red, attacking agent is placed into the environment.
The blue agent is a learner and uses RL to learn how to
achieve the task at hand, whereas the red agent is stochastic
and is described in more detail in Section 2.5. The objective
of the blue agent is to successfully stop the red agent from
compromising all of the nodes within the network. The
red agent’s objective is to achieve total compromise. These
objectives were chosen due to their similarities with the stag-
ing phase of a ransomware attack, where the attacker wants
to impact the highest percentage of assets as possible as
well as ensuring that training episodes would not terminate
too early.
2.3. Defending Agent Conﬁguration
2.3.1. A CTION SET
The defenders action space, a, consists of three actions,
patch, recover and noop. Each of these actions are described
in Table 1.

--- PAGE 4 ---
ACD-G: Enhancing Autonomous Cyber Defense Agent Generalization Through Graph Embedded Network Representation
This action space composition has been formulated to pro-
vide the agent with a means of both proactive ( patch) and
reactive (recover) response. The patch value of 0.2 was cho-
sen to provide agents a means of reducing node vulnerability
by a meaningful amount, whilst restricting their ability to
create invulnerable hosts rapidly and ‘game’ the simulation.
In reality, these actions would both likely have different
costs and associated timescales, which would add another
layer of complexity and would need to be incorporated into
either the agent’s reward function or the simulation itself.
However this is outside the scope of this work.
2.3.2. O BSERVATION SPACE
We compose two different observation spaces which we
labelled standardObs and graphObs. The conditions for
both observation spaces share a number of common fea-
tures and include all node vulnerability values N V , where
N V = nv1, nv2, ..., nvn and compromised statuses C,
where C = c1, c2, ..., cn. Alongside these shared fea-
tures, both sets of agents are provided with a different
structural representation of the network they are defend-
ing. standardObs provides the agents with a ﬂattened adja-
cency matrix network representation A where ∥A∥ = n × n
and n is the number of nodes within the network. graphObs
provides the agents with a ﬁxed length graph embedded net-
work representation F , generated using the FEA THER-G
whole graph embedding algorithm (Rozemberczki & Sarkar,
2020) where ∥F ∥ = 500.
Table 2. Observation Space Conditions
Observation Space NV C A F
standardObs ✓ ✓ ✓
graphObs ✓ ✓ ✓
NV: Node Vulnerability Scores C: Compromised Statuses A:
Adjacency Matrix F: FEATHER-G Graph Embedding
The FEA THER-G algorithm is a graph embedding approach
which is capable of embedding non-attributed whole graphs.
FEA THER-G calculates graph characteristic functions using
the probabilities derived from the transition probabilities
of random walks in a computationally efﬁcient manner. Its
computational efﬁciency was one of the reasons it was cho-
sen for this experimentation. FEA THER-G does not require
any computationally intensive training because it derives
the embeddings from the statistical proprieties of the in-
putted graph. This is well suited to an RL use-case due
to the number of training experiences needed to generate
useful policies. In addition, it provides a means of gener-
ating graph embedding for the observation space quickly.
Whilst no computational limitations were encountered, due
to the limited number of actions that could make changes
to the underlying graph, if agents are able to take actions
such as isolating nodes, generating a new graph embedding
representation should be computationally inexpensive.
The second reason is that, due to not requiring training and
deriving the embeddings from the statistical properties of the
input graph, the graph embeddings are deterministic. This
means that when faced with the same graph, FEA THER-G
will output an identical graph embedding. This property
was viewed favorably as it could support generalizability
by providing the agent with a common looking map of
the network it was defending at any given moment. This
observation space transformation was implemented using
an OpenAI Observation Wrapper 2.
2.4. Reward Function
The reward function used for all experiments was a score
based on the percentage of nodes compromised. If we let
N be the total number of nodes within the network and Co
be the total number of nodes compromised, then the reward
function R is:
R = N − Co
N .
This reward function incentivizes the blue agent to minimize
the number of compromised nodes within the network and
thus increase it’s per-timesteps reward. The terminal episode
reward is 100 for successfully surviving until the episode
end and − 100 for unsuccessfully surviving until episode
end. This means that for a 500 timestep episode, the optimal
reward is 599.
2.5. Attacking Agent Conﬁguration
The simulation would not be complete without an attacking
agent. Each episode has one red agent which is represented
by a probabilistic attacker with two possible actions - a basic
attack action or a zero-day action. The basic attack action is
an attack on a node where the ‘attack strength’, as, of the
attack is based upon both the attacker’s skill level, and the
target node’s vulnerability score, nvn. The attacker skill, s,
is deﬁned at the the beginning of a scenario to be between
0 < s ≤ 100, giving the attack strength as:
as = s2
s + (1 − nvn) .
Once the attack strength as has been calculated, a threshold
value t is uniformly sampled from t ∼ U [0, 100] and the
2Observation space wrappers are used to trans-
form OpenAI Gym Observation Space objects - An
example implementation can be found here -
https:
//github.com/openai/gym/blob/master/gym/
wrappers/flatten_observation.py

--- PAGE 5 ---
ACD-G: Enhancing Autonomous Cyber Defense Agent Generalization Through Graph Embedded Network Representation
attacks success is determined by:
c =
{
unsuccessful, if as < t,
successful, if as/geqt.
The second action is a zero day action and is a guaranteed
node compromise, regardless of the node’s vulnerability
score. At the beginning of each episode the red agent starts
with a single zero day action and prioritizes its usage. When
the agent has no zero-days available, the agent will use
its basic attack action to randomly target connected, un-
compromised nodes. The red agent then periodically gains
additional zero days at a rate of one per three timesteps.
This rate of zero day generation was chosen to ensure that a
red agent could consistently make progress within a network
even when a blue agent had reduced the node vulnerabilities
signiﬁcantly. In addition, a stochastic attacker was chosen
(as opposed to a deterministic attacker) to provide an ab-
stract representation of different attackers across episodes,
and ensure the attacker behavior was diverse across training
and evaluation.
2.6. Algorithm
All the agents within the experiments used the Proximal Pol-
icy Optimization (PPO) ( Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm
which has been implemented as part of the Stable Baselines
3 Deep RL library. PPO was chosen primarily for its strong
performance across a range of different tasks. The default
hyperparameters provided within Stable Baselines 3 were
used, no hyperparameter optimization was undertaken and
the same hyperparameters were used across all observation
space conditions and environment sizes.
2.7. Training and Evaluation Protocol
The training and evaluation protocol outlined below was
used for both the StandardObs and GraphObs agents.
All agents were trained and evaluated using Amazon Web
Services (AWS) Sagemaker Notebook Instances using a
compute optimized ml.c5.9xlarge with 36 CPUs and 72 GiB
RAM.
2.7.1. T RAINING PROTOCOL
At the beginning of training, three random seeds were cho-
sen. These random seeds were then used to create three
uniquely seeded agents for each of the observation space
conditions resulting in six PPO agents. Each of these
agents were then trained individually for a total of 5 million
timesteps within a training environment unique to the agent.
This number of training timesteps was chosen to provide
agents with sufﬁcient training time, especially those within
the larger environment sizes. It is shown in Fig. 2 that across
all environment sizes the mean reward for agents is typi-
cally still increasing at ﬁve million timesteps, suggesting
the agents are still learning. Techniques such as domain
randomisation were not implemented as part of the training
process in order to allow us to measure the raw effectiveness
of the agent’s observation space composition when faced
with unseen environments.
2.7.2. E VALUATION PROTOCOL
Once trained, all agents were set to deterministic mode and
then placed into 50 random environments for 10 episodes,
each resulting in 500 evaluation episodes. Each of the 50
evaluation environments used a unique, randomly initial-
ized graph generated using the amended Erd ˝os-R´enyi graph
generator described in Section 2.2, with an edge probability
value of p = 0.1 as the environments topology. For each of
the evaluation episodes, both the episode length and reward
attained were recorded.
2.8. Metrics Reported for Training and Evaluation
In order to provide a means of comparison between dif-
ferent training environments and between different agent’s
performance, a number of evaluation metrics were collected
during agent training and evaluation. During agent training,
an expanding window mean was calculated for both Episode
Reward and Episode Length. This provided a means of
tracking the progress of training and the data collected is
shown in Fig. 2.
During the evaluation phase, we collected both Episode Re-
ward and Episode Length for each agent evaluation episode.
This data was then used to calculate a range of summary
statistics such as max, min, standard deviation and mean.
Following the procedure outlined in the work of ( Henderson
et al., 2017) these evaluation metrics were then aggregated
in several ways to produce a robust representation of agent
performance.
Alongside reporting the mean, we also report the truncated
mean where scores from the upper and lower quartile were
removed and then mean was recalculated. This procedure
ensures that any outliers are removed (such as those pro-
duced by a very highly performing agent) and provides
a robust representation of the central tendency across all
agents trained within the same conditions. Using this trun-
cated mean, a 95% conﬁdence interval was also calculated
to provide a means of comparing variability and robustness.
3. Results
3.1. Training
To understand the training performance, both the Mean
Reward and Mean Episode Length calculated during agent

--- PAGE 6 ---
ACD-G: Enhancing Autonomous Cyber Defense Agent Generalization Through Graph Embedded Network Representation
0 1 2 3 4 5
Timesteps
1e6
0
100
200
300
400
Mean Reward
Mean Reward - Training
0 1 2 3 4 5
Timesteps
1e6
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Mean Episode Length
Mean Episode Length - Training
StandardObs 10 Nodes
GraphObs 10 Nodes
StandardObs 20 Nodes
GraphObs 20 Nodes
StandardObs 40 Nodes
GraphObs 40 Nodes
Figure 2. Mean Reward and Mean Episode Length during ﬁve million training timesteps across all three environment sizes
training can be found in the Fig. 2 . Each line depicted
within Fig. 2 is the mean across all three agents trained
within that environment and observation space condition.
Each line has a shaded area which depicts the width of
the standard deviation about the mean.
Fig. 2 shows that
when comparing agents within the same environment size,
the composition of the observation space neither aids or
hinders the agents, with both agent types exhibiting highly
similar scores for both reward and episode length. The
data also suggests there is a relationship between agent
training and environment size. We ﬁnd that when examining
episode reward, both
StandardObs and GraphObs agents
within the 10-node and 20-node environments begin by
rapidly improving performance until approximately 750,000
timesteps and then continue to make smaller incremental
improvements until the end of training.
In contrast, the agents within the 40-node environment size
begin strongly and then make incremental progress through-
out training. This behavior is partially explained within
the right hand panel of
Fig. 2 . Again, for agents trained
within the 10 and 20 node environment sizes a similar trend
is exhibited as seen in the mean reward data. The agents
start poorly, rapidly improve and then have a longer period
of incremental improvement. However, when viewing the
mean episode data, we can see that the for the 40-node en-
vironments, both StandardObs and GraphObs agents are
achieving a near optimal score in terms of episode length
from the very beginning. It is reasonable to conclude this is
likely a function of the environment’s size and the number
of attackers within the simulation. The single attacker sim-
ply cannot compromise the whole of the 40 node network
quickly enough. The fundamental insight however is that
regardless of the observation space composition used, the
agents are performing comparably and therefore provides a
useful baseline to take into agent evaluation.
3.2. Evaluation
Table 3 shows the experimental results for this study. For
the 10-node environment, the standardObs agents typi-
cally perform better in terms of both reward and episode
length across all measures. In contrast,
graphObs agents
within 20-node environment size clearly beneﬁt from the
addition of a graph embedded network representation with
the signiﬁcant differences between metrics such as mean
reward, truncated mean reward and conﬁdence intervals.
However, this trend changes within the 40-node environ-
ment size where the results are mixed. Interestingly, the re-
sults from the 40-node environment suggest that whilst both
standardObs and graphObs agents are performing com-
parably in terms of episode length, the graphObs agents
are performing better in terms of reward. The most notable
difference is seen in the maximum reward, with graphObs
successfully achieving the maximum - signiﬁcantly higher
than that achieved by standardObs in the same environ-
ment size.
These results individually provide insight into agent perfor-
mance within speciﬁc environment sizes, but when consid-
ered together also tell another story. The results suggest that
there is a trade-off between when the graph embedded net-
work representation is helpful or not based on environment
complexity in terms of number of nodes and edges. Fig. 1
provides visualisation of example environment graphs used
during experimentation.
The results presented in Table 3 suggest that the graph em-
bedded network representation makes little difference within
the 10-node environment size. This theoretically makes

--- PAGE 7 ---
ACD-G: Enhancing Autonomous Cyber Defense Agent Generalization Through Graph Embedded Network Representation
10-node 20-node 40-node
standardObs graphObs standardObs graphObs standardObs graphObs
Reward
Mean 150.4 125.19 138.38 181.94 100.79 122.59
Max 599 599 599 599 430.05 599
Min -93.4 -93 -85.9 -83.1 -69.23 -67.25
Std 233.71 213.19 177.84 178.95 127.92 173.25
Trunc. Mean 137.06 117,35 143.33 187.19 103.26 123.14
99% CI (70.38, 203.73) (57.31, 177.4) (99.52, 187.13) (146.38, 228) (72.42, 134.1) (77, 169.29)
Ep. Length
Mean 295.38 279.21 351.8 396.04 359.33 355.37
Max 500 500 500 500 500 500
Min 16 15 37 40 70 73
Std 231.08 232.52 208.6 185.24 185.17 187.02
Trunc. Mean 285.8 277.9 373.45 421.1 372.7 366.56
99% CI
(223.18,
348.42)
(214.53,
341.28)
(328.32,
418.58)
(389.43,
452.77)
(328.45,
416.93)
(325.35,
407.76)
Table 3. Evaluation Metrics for each observation space condition and environment size. Bold numbers are used to highlight the highest
scores between observation space conditions in each environment size.
sense because of how simple the environment is in terms of
number of nodes and number of edges. A 500 dimension
network representation is likely overkill and an adjacency
matrix representation is more succinct. As the complexity
grows in the 20-node environment, the graph embedded
network representation signiﬁcantly helps and provides the
agents with an enhanced view of the cyber terrain it is de-
fending. The effect of the enhanced network representation
becomes mixed when moving to the 40-node environment
size and can likely be attributed to the increased number of
edges and density of the graph.
4. Conclusion
To conclude, this paper has explored the impact of including
a graph embedded network representation into the obser-
vation space of an autonomous cyber defense agent. Two
observation space conditions were created, one with an ad-
jacency matrix network representation and one with a graph
embedded network representation. Agents using both obser-
vation space conditions were then trained within a unique
environment for ﬁve million timesteps before being evalu-
ated within a series of unseen randomized environments.
The primary ﬁnding of this work suggests that there is a
trade-off between the effectiveness of introducing graph
embedded network representations and the complexity of
the network to defend. The results suggest that the graph
embedding may become less useful when the environment
is either simple (in terms of number of nodes and number of
edges) as its greatly increasing complexity when compared
to an adjacency matrix or highly dense (in terms of number
of edges) as it could be over simplifying the relationships.
However, when faced with a network which is of modest
node count and edge density, the graph embedded network
representation provides a signiﬁcant boost in performance
within unseen environments. This demonstrates the utility of
including the enhanced network representation as part of an
autonomous cyber defense agent and raises some interesting
questions related to agent observation space composition,
especially when the focus is on developing generalizable
agents.
5. Future Work
The results from this paper highlight several future work
areas. Only three different environment sizes were used
within this study. One possible avenue of further study
would be to explore the identiﬁed trade-off between environ-
ment complexity and potency of a graph embedded network
representation in more detail. This could be done by con-
ducting a broader set of experiments across a larger number
of environment sizes.
Another area to investigating would be the impact that do-
main randomisation has on the generalizability performance
when added to the training environment generation. This
could change aspects of the environment generation pro-
cess such as the values for the node vulnerability lower and
upper bounds or the edge probability within the graph gen-
erator. This enhanced variety of training experience could
enhance performance across both observation conditions,
and it would be interesting to see if the trade-off is still
exhibited.
Moreover, exploring the possibility of creating global vulner-
ability and compromised status observation features along-
side the network embedding could also be a potential avenue
for future work. This could provide insight into whether
it is possible to train agents which can generalize across
different environment sizes. This could open the door to

--- PAGE 8 ---
ACD-G: Enhancing Autonomous Cyber Defense Agent Generalization Through Graph Embedded Network Representation
the possibility of agents being able to perform well within
a range of different environments in terms of both size and
topology.
References
Agarwal, R., Machado, M. C., Castro, P . S., and Bellemare,
M. G. Contrastive behavioral similarity embeddings for
generalization in reinforcement learning, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.05265.
Akbari, I., Tahoun, E., Salahuddin, M. A., Limam, N., and
Boutaba, R. Atmos: Autonomous threat mitigation in
sdn using reinforcement learning. In NOMS 2020-2020
IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Sympo-
sium, pp. 1–9. IEEE, 2020.
Balaji, B., Mallya, S., Genc, S., Gupta, S., Dirac, L., Khare,
V ., Roy, G., Sun, T., Tao, Y ., Townsend, B., et al. Deep-
racer: Autonomous racing platform for experimentation
with sim2real reinforcement learning. In 2020 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,
pp. 2746–2754. IEEE, 2020.
Brockman, G., Cheung, V ., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J.,
Schulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W. Openai gym,
2016.
Chaudhary, S., O’Brien, A., and Xu, S. Automated post-
breach penetration testing through reinforcement learning.
In 2020 IEEE Conference on Communications and Net-
work Security (CNS), pp. 1–2. IEEE, 2020.
Chowdhary, A., Huang, D., Mahendran, J. S., Romo, D.,
Deng, Y ., and Sabur, A. Autonomous security analysis
and penetration testing. In 2020 16th International Con-
ference on Mobility, Sensing and Networking (MSN) , pp.
508–515. IEEE, 2020.
Dawood, H. A. Graph theory and cyber security. In 2014 3rd
International Conference on Advanced Computer Science
Applications and Technologies, pp. 90–96. IEEE, 2014.
Hammar, K. and Stadler, R. Learning intrusion prevention
policies through optimal stopping. In 2021 17th Interna-
tional Conference on Network and Service Management
(CNSM), pp. 509–517. IEEE, 2021.
Henderson, P ., Islam, R., Bachman, P ., Pineau, J., Precup,
D., and Meger, D. Deep reinforcement learning that
matters. CoRR, abs/1709.06560, 2017. URL
http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1709.06560.
Igl, M., Farquhar, G., Luketina, J., Boehmer, W., and
Whiteson, S. Transient non-stationarity and generali-
sation in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.05826, 2020.
Kaloudi, N. and Li, J. The ai-based cyber threat landscape:
A survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 53(1), feb 2020. ISSN
0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3372823. URL https://
doi.org/10.1145/3372823.
Kostrikov, I., Y arats, D., and Fergus, R. Image augmen-
tation is all you need: Regularizing deep reinforcement
learning from pixels, 2020. URL
https://arxiv.
org/abs/2004.13649.
Kott, A., Swami, A., and West, B. J. The fog of war in
cyberspace. Computer, 49(11):84–87, 2016. doi: 10.
1109/MC.2016.333.
Li, L., Fayad, R., and Taylor, A. Cygil: A cyber gym
for training autonomous agents over emulated network
systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03331, 2021.
Mern, J., Hatch, K., Silva, R., Brush, J., and Kochender-
fer, M. J. Reinforcement learning for industrial con-
trol network cyber security orchestration. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.05332, 2021.
Microsoft Defender Research Team. Cyberbat-
tlesim. https://github.com/microsoft/
cyberbattlesim, 2021. Created by Christian Seifert,
Michael Betser, William Blum, James Bono, Kate
Farris, Emily Goren, Justin Grana, Kristian Holsheimer,
Brandon Marken, Joshua Neil, Nicole Nichols, Jugal
Parikh, Haoran Wei.
Molina-Markham, A., Winder, R. K., and Ridley, A.
Network defense is not a game. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.10262, 2021.
Paul, E. and Alfr ´ed, R. On random graphs i. Publicationes
Mathematicae (Debrecen), 6:290–297, 1959.
Rafﬁn, A., Hill, A., Gleave, A., Kanervisto, A., Ernestus,
M., and Dormann, N. Stable-baselines3: Reliable rein-
forcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine
Learning Research , 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http:
//jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1364.html.
Ridley, A. Machine learning for autonomous cyber defense.
The Next Wave, 22(1):7–14, 2018.
Rozemberczki, B. and Sarkar, R. Characteristic Func-
tions on Graphs: Birds of a Feather, from Statistical
Descriptors to Parametric Models. In Proceedings of the
29th ACM International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management (CIKM ’20) , pp. 1325–1334.
ACM, 2020.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P ., Radford, A.,
and Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algo-
rithms, 2017. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/
1707.06347.

--- PAGE 9 ---
ACD-G: Enhancing Autonomous Cyber Defense Agent Generalization Through Graph Embedded Network Representation
Standen, M., Lucas, M., Bowman, D., Richer, T. J., Kim,
J., and Marriott, D. Cyborg: A gym for the devel-
opment of autonomous cyber agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.09118, 2021.
Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An
introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Tran, K., Akella, A., Standen, M., Kim, J., Bowman, D.,
Richer, T., and Lin, C.-T. Deep hierarchical reinforcement
agents for automated penetration testing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.06449, 2021.
Zhao, W., Queralta, J. P ., and Westerlund, T. Sim-to-real
transfer in deep reinforcement learning for robotics: a sur-
vey. In 2020 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational
Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 737–744. IEEE, 2020.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Cranfield University
CERES Research  Repository https://dspace.lib.cranfield.ac.uk/
Cranfield Defence and Security Staff publications (CDS)
ACD-G: Enhancing autonomous cyber
defense agent generalization through
graph embedded network representation
Collyer, Josh
2022-07-23
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International
Collyer J, Andrew A, Hodges D. (2022) ACD-G: Enhancing autonomous cyber defense agent
generalization through graph embedded network representation. In: 39th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2022), 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(ML4Cyber workshop)
https://icml.cc/
Downloaded from CERES Research Repository, Cranfield University