
--- PAGE 1 ---
AUTOMATEDCYBERDEFENSE WITHGENERALIZABLE
GRAPH-BASEDREINFORCEMENTLEARNINGAGENTS
Isaiah J. King 1,2, Benjamin Bowman 1, & H. Howie Huang 1,2
1Cybermonic LLC, 2 The George Washington University GraphLab
{isaiah, benjamin, howie}@cybermonic.com
ABSTRACT
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) is emerging as a viable strategy for automated
cyber defense (ACD). The traditional RL approach represents networks as a list
of computers in various states of safety or threat. Unfortunately, these models are
forced to overfit to specific network topologies, rendering them ineffective when
faced with even small environmental perturbations. In this work, we frame ACD
as a two-player context-based partially observable Markov decision problem with
observations represented as attributed graphs. This approach allows our agents to
reason through the lens of relational inductive bias. Agents learn how to reason
about hosts interacting with other system entities in a more general manner, and
their actions are understood as edits to the graph representing the environment.
By introducing this bias, we will show that our agents can better reason about the
states of networks, and zero-shot adapt to new ones. We show that this approach
outperforms the state-of-the-art by a wide margin, and makes our agents capable
of defending never-before-seen networks against a wide range of adversaries in a
variety of complex, and multi-agent environments.
1 INTRODUCTION
Automated cyber defense (ACD) systems are agents which, with no human intervention, defend a
network from complex cyber-attacks–automated, or human (Vyas et al., 2023). Like an autonomous
security operations center, ACD agents monitor the network at all times, waiting to respond to a
cyber-attack. When an incident occurs, the ACD agent would have the power to update firewall rules,
reset machines, etc., to prevent the intruder from spreading. Using a simulated network environment,
we can train agents for this task using reinforcement learning (RL). Prior works in this field compress
the environment into a vector and feed it into deep RL networks (Chai et al., 2020; Chowdhary
et al., 2021; Eghtesad et al., 2020; Piplai et al., 2022; Ridley, 2018). This naive approach produces
agents that are adept at defending the network they were trained on, but overly sensitive to minor
changes in the network topology. As such, these agents are rarely evaluated in new and/or modified
environments, a situation that is essential for any technology to be viable in the real world.
This observation coincides with a very old problem in RL: environmental overfitting (Whiteson
et al., 2011). In traditional supervised learning, a model has become overfit if it memorizes every
data point and is unable to generalize about data it has never seen. To account for this, one would
partition the data into disjoint training and testing sets to ensure the model can adapt to uncertainty.
In RL, the uncertainty lies in how an action will affect the environment. Environmental overfitting
occurs when an agent no longer has uncertainty about the world it interacts with. Admittedly, model
overfitting is not a problem in some cases; most RL benchmarks train and evaluate on the same
environments (Kirk et al., 2023), and why shouldn’t they? An agent that plays chess can always
expect the game to start with the same two sets of pieces placed in the same way across the same
sixty-four squares. There is no reason to expect a chess-playing agent to adapt to a 9×9 board with
five knights. But, for many real-world systems, such as ACD, the assumption that the environment
will never change does not hold (Almasan et al., 2022).
One way to represent differences between networks’ topologies and encourage agents to learn poli-
cies that generalize across environments is to represent them as graphs. The use of graphs for
state representation has been done by several prior works in this field (Ridley, 2018; Collyer et al.,
1
arXiv:2509.16151v1  [cs.LG]  19 Sep 2025
自动化网络防御与通用图强化学习代理
以赛亚·J·金1,2, 本杰明·鲍曼1,&H·黄1,21网络monic公司, 2 乔治华盛
顿大学图实验室{isaiah,benjamin,howie}@cybermonic.com
摘要
深度强化学习（RL）正逐渐成为自动化网络防御（ACD）的一种可行策略。
传统的RL方法将网络表示为处于不同安全或威胁状态下的计算机列表。然
而，这些模型被迫过度拟合特定的网络拓扑，导致它们在面对微小环境扰
动时无效。在这项工作中，我们将ACD构建为一个双玩家基于上下文的非
完全可观察马尔可夫决策过程，其中观察以属性图的形式表示。这种方法
使我们的代理能够从关系归纳偏差的角度进行推理。代理学习以更通用的
方式推理主机与其他系统实体交互的方法，而它们的行动则被理解为对表
示环境的图的编辑。通过引入这种偏差，我们将证明我们的代理能够更好
地推理网络状态，并对新的网络进行零样本适应。我们证明这种方法大幅
优于现有技术，并使我们的代理能够在各种复杂的多代理环境中，防御从
未见过的新网络，对抗广泛的对手。
1简介
自动化网络防御（ACD）系统是无需人工干预的代理，用于防御网络免受复杂的网络攻击——无论是
自动攻击还是人为攻击（Vyas等人，2023）。像自主安全运营中心一样，ACD代理全天候监控网
络，等待响应网络攻击。当发生事件时，ACD代理将有权更新防火墙规则、重置机器等，以阻止入
侵者扩散。使用模拟网络环境，我们可以通过强化学习（RL）训练代理执行此任务。该领域的先前
工作将环境压缩为向量，并将其输入深度强化学习网络（Chai等人，2020；Chowdhary等人，
2021；Eghtesad等人，2020；Piplai等人，2022；Ridley，2018）。这种简单的方法产生的代理
擅长防御其训练的网络，但对网络拓扑的微小变化过于敏感。因此，这些代理很少在新的和/或修改
过的环境中进行评估，而这种情况对于任何技术要在现实世界中发挥作用至关重要。
这一观察结果与强化学习（RL）中一个非常古老的问题相吻合：环境过拟合（Whiteson等人，
2011）。在传统的监督学习中，如果模型记住了所有数据点且无法泛化到从未见过的数据，则认为其
过拟合。为了解决这个问题，人们会将数据划分为互不相交的训练集和测试集，以确保模型能够适应
不确定性。在强化学习中，不确定性在于一个动作将如何影响环境。当智能体不再对其交互的世界存
在不确定性时，就会发生环境过拟合。诚然，在某些情况下，模型过拟合并非问题；大多数强化学习
基准都在同一环境中进行训练和评估（Kirk等人，2023），这又有什么不对呢？一个下棋的智能体
总是可以预期游戏将从相同的方式开始，在相同的六十四个方格上放置相同的两套棋子。没有必要期
望一个下棋的智能体能够适应一个有五枚骑士的棋盘。但是，对于许多现实世界系统，例如ACD，
环境永远不会变化的假设并不成立（Almasan等人，2022）。
一种表示网络拓扑差异并鼓励智能体学习跨环境泛化策略的方法是将其表示为图。该领域
已有若干先前工作使用图进行状态表示（Ridley,2018;Collyer等人,
1
arXiv:2509.16151v1  [cs.LG]  19 Sep 2025


--- PAGE 2 ---
2022; Gangupantulu et al., 2021), but none process the graph directly. Agents in prior work re-
ceive graphs representing the environment as part of their observations, but when processing them
for their agents, the graph is compressed into a vector, and information is lost. Most often, the
topological structure of the graph is thrown out entirely, and information about individual nodes
is concatenated together (Piplai et al., 2022; Ridley, 2018; Booker & Musman, 2020; Foley et al.,
2022; Walter et al., 2021; Wolk et al., 2022). This results in models that learn about implicit rela-
tionships between nodes but cannot adapt to explicit changes of novel network topologies because
these changes cannot be communicated to the agents. Perturbations as simple as changing the order
in which nodes are indexed can cause these models to perform no better than random.
In this work, we propose a novel, graph-centric strategy for highly generalizable automated network
defense agents. Harnessing the power of relational inductive bias (Battaglia et al., 2018), we pro-
vide our models with the full graph of the network, which they process without compression using
a graph neural network (GNN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016). Inductive GNNs process graph input in a
permutation-invariant manner and are structurally unable to rely on fixed node identities or posi-
tions. Automorphisms between nodes are implicitly understood to GNN-based models as features
and edges are identical regardless of node mapping. However, this is not the case with traditional
models as the columns of their parameters are fixed, such that automorphic node permutations do
not produce identical outputs. The output of this process is a matrix of node representations, called
embeddings, which contain information about each node’s features, as well as the features of their
k-hop neighborhood. The node embeddings are then used as inputs to a policy network that selects
the best action. Importantly, actions are not formulated as a fixed-length list, as is done by prior
works, including graph-based approaches (Janisch et al., 2020); instead, we represent actions as
functions upon individual nodes in the graph. This allows for changing topologies and changing
action spaces. Adding an additional host to a network means adding several more actions relating to
the defense of that host. For tabular methods, this would require fully retraining the agent; with our
method, the action space is already a function of the graph size, so no retraining is required.
This work presents a generalizable framework for graph-based RL that allows for actions upon
nodes and edges, with variably sized graphs. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is the
first time relational inductive bias has been applied to ACD. We will show that our approach finds
defense strategies that generalize better than prior work in the same field. The generality afforded by
relational inductive bias means our agents can be deployed to new environments without retraining,
saving potentially days of training time. In a simulated network environment, our agents score
more than 4x higher than prior works and maintain that high score across environments with varied
numbers of hosts–something the prior works are unable to do at all. In more complex environments,
we show that when we perturb the topology or introduce new adversaries, our models perform
better than all prior works. Finally, we show that our approach is also applicable to multi-agent
reinforcement learning problems. Ours is currently the highest performing non-heuristic policy in
the CC4 (TTCP CAGE Working Group, 2023) environment. The source code for the agents and
experiments is available athttps://github.com/cybermonic/ACD-With-GraphRL
2 RELATEDWORK
Relational Inductive Bias: As in traditional machine learning, an overfit RL agent will optimize its
policy to the random noise in the environment rather than its true distribution. This reflects a high
degree of variance in the model. To counter overfitting, one must increase the model’s bias (Geman
et al., 1992). Inductive bias helps models constrain their search space and reason with more gener-
alized approaches (Mitchell, 1980). Inductive bias can be created implicitly via the choice of neural
architecture, or explicitly by constraining the data the model receives. Motivated by the strong argu-
ments of Battaglia et al. (2018) in favor of relational inductive bias, as well as the numerous positive
results from empirical studies (Hamrick et al., 2018; Janisch et al., 2020; Khalil et al., 2017; Wang
et al., 2018) we represent the networks we wish to defend as graphs.
RL for Automated Cyber Defense: There exist many agents trained for cyber-tasks that focus on
individual entities within networks, or abstract networks into individual units to defend (Eghtesad
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2018). When networks are represented as graphs, they are commonly ab-
stracted into tabular representations for simplicity (Booker & Musman, 2020; Foley et al., 2022;
Applebaum et al., 2022). Works that include graph representations often focus on finding vulner-
2
2022;Gangupantulu等人,2021），但它们都不直接处理图。先前工作中的智能体接收
表示环境的图作为其观察的一部分，但在处理这些图时，图会被压缩成一个向量，导致信
息丢失。通常情况下，图中的拓扑结构会被完全丢弃，而关于单个节点的信息会被连接在
一起（Piplai等人,2022;Ridley,2018;Booker&Musman,2020;Foley等人,2022;
Walter等人,2021;Wolk等人,2022）。这导致模型只能学习节点之间的隐式关系，而无
法适应新网络拓扑的显式变化，因为这些变化无法传达给智能体。即使是简单的改变节点
索引的顺序这种扰动，也会导致这些模型的性能不优于随机水平。
在这项工作中，我们提出了一种新颖的、以图为中心的策略，用于开发高度泛化的自动化网络
防御代理。我们借助关系归纳偏置（Battaglia等人，2018）的力量，向模型提供整个网络图，
它们使用图神经网络（GNN）（Kipf&Welling，2016）对其进行处理，而无需压缩。归纳
GNN以置换不变的方式处理图输入，并且在结构上无法依赖固定的节点身份或位置。节点之间
的自同构关系被隐式地理解为基于GNN的模型，因为无论节点映射如何，特征和边都是相同的。
然而，传统模型则不同，因为它们的参数列是固定的，因此自同构节点置换不会产生相同的输
出。该过程的输出是一个节点表示矩阵，称为嵌入，其中包含每个节点的特征信息，以及它们
各自的k跳邻域的特征。然后，节点嵌入被用作策略网络输入，该网络选择最佳动作。重要的是，
动作不是像先前工作那样表示为固定长度的列表，包括基于图的方法（Janisch等人，2020）；
相反，我们将动作表示为对图中单个节点的函数。这使得拓扑结构和动作空间都可以改变。向
网络添加一个额外的主机意味着添加更多与该主机防御相关的动作。对于表格方法，这需要完
全重新训练代理；而我们的方法中，动作空间已经是图大小的函数，因此无需重新训练。
这项工作提出了一种通用的基于图的强化学习框架，该框架允许对节点和边进行操作，并支持
可变大小的图。据我们所知，我们的方法首次将关系归纳偏差应用于ACD。我们将证明，我们
的方法能够找到比同一领域先前工作更泛化的防御策略。关系归纳偏差带来的泛化能力意味着
我们的智能体可以在新环境中部署而无需重新训练，从而节省潜在的数天训练时间。在一个模
拟的网络环境中，我们的智能体得分比先前工作高出4倍以上，并在具有不同主机数量的环境中
保持这一高分——而先前工作完全无法做到这一点。在更复杂的环境中，我们展示了当我们对拓
扑进行扰动或引入新的对手时，我们的模型表现优于所有先前工作。最后，我们证明我们的方
法也适用于多智能体强化学习问题。目前，我们的方法在CC4（TTCPCAGE工作组，2023）
环境中表现最佳的非启发式策略。智能体和实验的源代码可在
https://github.com/cybermonic/ACD‑With‑GraphRL获取。
2相关工作
关系归纳偏差：与传统机器学习类似，过度拟合的强化学习智能体会优化其策略以适应环境中
的随机噪声，而不是其真实分布。这反映了模型中高度的方差。为了对抗过度拟合，必须增加
模型的偏差（Geman等人，1992）。归纳偏差有助于模型约束其搜索空间，并以更通用的方
法进行推理（Mitchell，1980）。归纳偏差可以通过选择神经网络架构隐式地创建，或通过约
束模型接收的数据显式地创建。受Battaglia等人（2018）强烈支持关系归纳偏差的论证，以
及来自实证研究的众多积极结果（Hamrick等人，2018；Janisch等人，2020；Khalil等人，
2017；Wang等人，2018）的启发，我们将希望防御的网络表示为图。
RL用于自动化网络防御：存在许多针对网络中单个实体或抽象网络为单个单元进行防御的
智能体（Eghtesad等人，2020；Wu等人，2018）。当网络表示为图时，通常为了简化而
抽象成表格表示（Booker&Musman，2020；Foley等人，2022；Applebaum等人，
2022）。包含图表示的研究工作通常专注于寻找漏洞
2


--- PAGE 3 ---
abilities (Piplai et al., 2022; Yousefi et al., 2018) or automated penetration testing (Gangupantulu
et al., 2021; Walter et al., 2021). While many graph-based ACD agents exist in the literature, they
are often constrained in unrealistic ways. Prior works, (Chai et al., 2020; Chowdhary et al., 2021;
Ridley, 2018; Cam, 2020) all consider the graph structure of networks, and train DQNs to defend
them. However, they all fail to consider what happens if nodes are added or removed, or even if
the order in which nodes are indexed changes. More relevant to our work are the ACD approaches
which highlight the importance of generalization to new topologies. One method to achieve this is
aggregation. Gao et al. (2021) create a generalizable agent by creating an action space that is inde-
pendent of node count and order. Instead, when an action is selected, it is applied to the node that
can utilize it most efficiently according to a value function. Similarly, Gao & Wang (2021) aggregate
the entirety of the network into a single entity to be defended; their observations are the network’s
state in aggregate acrossktimesteps. However, it would be difficult to directly apply either of these
approaches to the more general ACD environments we evaluate, as they are both specialized for
narrow threat models. The most similar prior work to ours is Doorman et al. (2022). They model
the network as a graph and train a DQN to select triplets of nodes to rewire for network hardening.
Their approach is specific to this one task, however, and as we will show, it does not generalize well
to more varied action spaces, but it is notable in that it is fully inductive.
3 BACKGROUND
A graph is a set of discrete objectsVcalled nodes, and a set of edgesE={(u, v)|u, v∈ V}
denoting relationships between them. An attributed graph is a graph with features associated with
each node,f:V →R d. We denote these features asX. Finally, we define node embeddings as the
output of a functionΦ(V,E,X)that processes the graph to encode node features and topology into
a single vector. This function can be transductive, which means it can only produce embeddings for
nodes it has seen during training, or it may be inductive, which means it can produce embeddings
for nodes it has never seen before. We will evaluate both kinds of embedding functions.
A partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) is defined as the 7-tuple
M=⟨S,A,O,R,T, ϕ, p⟩.(1)
Here,Sis the set of states,Ais the set of actions, andp(s 0)is the distribution of possible starting
states.T(s ′ |s, a)is the possibly stochastic transition function that determines the next state given
a state and action.R:S × A →Ris a scalar reward function. The setOis the observation space,
which is derived from the true state via the functionϕ:S → O. Any policy acting uponMwill
only observe the output ofϕ.
Kirk et al. (2023) define context-based POMDPs (CMDPs) as the set of all possible POMDPs in a
space conditioned by a parameter sampled from distributionC. This parameter changes the possible
state space, transition probabilities, and rewards, but not the action space. If we divide the context
space into disjoint sets,M| Ctrain andM| Ctest, the objective is to find policyπwhich maximizes the
reward over CMDPs parameterized from the test space conditioned only on experiences from the
training space.
4 GRAPH-BASEDREINFORCEMENTLEARNING
In this section, we will describe the architecture of our graph-analytic models. We will first describe
how we represent observations as graphs and actions as graph edits. Next, we describe the three
models we evaluated: one transductive model, and two inductive models. Transductive models
assume the size and node-ordering of a graph is fixed, while inductive models can adapt to unseen
environments, with varying numbers of nodes. We used GCN as the GNN architecture, but this
approach is agnostic to the specific choice of GNN.1
1Experiments showed low variance between different choices of GNN architectures. We provide an ablation
study demonstrating this in Appendix B.
3
先前的工作（Chai等人，2020；Chowdhary等人，2021；Ridley，2018；Cam，2020）都
考虑了网络的结构，并训练深度Q网络来防御它们。然而，它们都没有考虑如果节点被添加或删
除，或者节点索引的顺序发生变化会发生什么。与我们工作更相关的是强调泛化到新拓扑结构
重要性的自动化网络防御方法。实现这一目标的一种方法是聚合。Gao等人（2021）通过创建
一个与节点数量和顺序无关的动作空间来创建一个可泛化的智能体。相反，当选择一个动作时，
它会被应用于能够最有效地利用该动作的节点，根据价值函数。类似地，Gao&Wang（2021）
将整个网络聚合为一个单一实体进行防御；他们的观察是网络在 k 个时间步长内的聚合状态。
然而，将这些方法直接应用于我们评估的更通用的自动化网络防御环境将非常困难，因为它们
都针对狭窄的威胁模型进行了专门设计。与我们最相似的先前工作是Doorman等人（2022）。
他们将网络建模为图，并训练一个深度Q网络来选择要重新连接的节点三元组以增强网络。然而，
他们的方法仅针对这一特定任务，正如我们将要展示的，它并不能很好地泛化到更多样化的动
作空间，但值得注意的是，它是完全归纳式的。
3背景
图是一组离散对象V ，称为节点，以及一组表示它们之间关系的边E = {(u, v) | u, v ∈ V}。
带属性的图是每个节点带有特征的图f : V → Rd。我们将这些特征表示为X。最后，我们定义
节点嵌入为函数Φ(V, E,X)的输出，该函数处理图以将节点特征和拓扑编码为单个向量。这个函
数可以是同态的，这意味着它只能为训练期间见过的节点产生嵌入，或者它可能是归纳的，这意
味着它可以产生它之前从未见过的节点的嵌入。我们将评估这两种类型的嵌入函数。
部分可观察马尔可夫决策过程(POMDP)定义为7元组
M = ⟨S, A, O, R, T , ϕ, p⟩. (1)
在这里， S 是状态集， A是动作集， p(s0) 是可能起始状态的分布。 T (s′ | s, a) 是可能
的随机转移函数，它根据状态和动作确定下一个状态。 R : S × A → R 是标量奖励函数。
集合O 是观察空间，它通过函数ϕ : S → O从真实状态导出。任何作用于M的策略都
只会观察到ϕ的输出。
Kirk等人(2023)将基于上下文的POMDPs(CMDPs)定义为在由从分布C中采样的参数条件
化的空间中所有可能的POMDPs的集合。该参数会改变可能的状态空间、转换概率和奖励，但
不会改变动作空间。如果我们把上下文空间划分为不相交的集合M|Ctrain 和M|Ctest，那么目标
就是在仅由训练空间经验条件化的测试空间参数化的CMDPs中找到最大化奖励的策略π 。
4基于图的强化学习
在本节中，我们将描述我们的图分析模型的架构。我们将首先描述如何将观察结果表示为图，
以及如何将动作表示为图编辑。接下来，我们将描述我们评估的三个模型：一个转导模型和两
个归纳模型。转导模型假设图的规模和节点顺序是固定的，而归纳模型可以适应未见过的环境，
节点数量可变。我们使用GCN作为GNN架构，但这种方法对GNN的具体选择是无关紧要的。1
1实验表明，不同的GNN架构选择之间方差较低。我们在附录B中提供了一个消融研究来证明这一点。
3


--- PAGE 4 ---
Figure 1: Transductive Actor
 Figure 2: Inductive Actor
4.1 STATE-ACTIONSPACE
States: In all experiments, we use individual hosts as nodes, and forms of inter-host communication
as edges. Other entities within a network can also be modeled as nodes in a graph, with their node
type specified as one of their node features. Unlike prior works which use features derived from
graphs as their observations (Collyer et al., 2022; Wolk et al., 2022), we use the attributed graph
itself. This means agents’ observations are represented by the 3-tupleO=⟨V,E,X⟩, representing
nodes, edges, and node features, respectively. Importantly, we do not assume the agent has full
visibility into the network. The graph provided in the observation may have missing information
about whether hosts are compromised, the possible paths an attacker could use to pivot through the
network, etc., such thatO ⊆ S.
Actions: Following the model of Janisch et al. (2020), we model each game as a system of objects
(or nodes) that have relationships (or edges) with one another. Actions can be performed upon some
subset of nodes to change the environment. Thus, for each actionable nodev i ∈ V a ⊆ V, given an
action spaceA={a 0, ..., an}, actions are represented as functions upon those nodes,a n(vi). This
makes the total action space for an environmentA ⊗ V a. By representing actions as functions upon
discrete objects, rather than a fixed array as is done by tabular methods (Watkins & Dayan, 1992),
we are free to increase or decrease the action space without retraining by changing the size of set
Va.
The results of actions produce graph edits. These edits may be in the form of node or edge additions
or deletions, or changes in nodes’ features. For example, the actiona n(vi)may create a nodev j
with an edge tov i; it could change the feature vectorx i associated with nodev i; or it could remove
the nodev i from the graph entirely. With this abstraction, we can further extend the action space to
include edge-level actions as a function ofan(vi, vj), upon actionable edgesEa. This work considers
environments that have node-level and edge-level actions,A=A V ∪ AE.
4.2 AGENTDESIGN
To combine the information about the graph structure, and its features, we use a graph neural network
(GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2008) to produce node embeddings. We employ a graph convolutional
network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016) for its expressiveness, and inductive abilities. The defining
function of the GCN is
H(ℓ+1) =σ
 
D
1
2 AD
1
2 H(ℓ)W(ℓ) +b (ℓ)
(2)
whereAis the adjacency matrix of the graph plusI.Dis the degree of each node, andW (ℓ) and
b(ℓ) are trainable parameters. For each node in the graph, this function averages the features of its
neighbors, then passes the output through a single fully connected nonlinear neural network layer.
UsingkGCN layers will encode information about each node’sk-hop neighborhood. In practice,
we use the more efficient message-passing paradigm implemented by PyTorch Geometric (Fey &
Lenssen, 2019).
The agent learns via Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). Both the actor-
and critic-networks create node embeddingsZusing 2-layer GCNs. The embeddings are then passed
through additional fully connected layers to produce the probability distribution function, or the state
value estimate for the actor and critic, respectively. We evaluate three methods to convert from node
embeddings to action probabilities. Using the terminology of graph representation learning, we refer
to these approaches as either inductive or transductive (Hamilton et al., 2017).
Transductive models operate as prior tabular RL approaches do. As shown in Figure 1, they concate-
nate the node embeddings into a single, fixed-sized vector, and pass it through a traditional neural
network to produce a single vector of size|V a| · |A|. This approach is not generalizable to new
4
图1：归纳式演员
 图2：演绎式演员
4.1状态‑动作空间
状态：在所有实验中，我们使用单个主机作为节点，并将主机间通信形式作为边。网络中的其
他实体也可以作为图中的节点进行建模，其节点类型指定为其节点特征之一。与先前使用从图
中派生的特征作为观察结果的工作（Collyer等人，2022年；Wolk等人，2022年）不同，我们
使用带属性的图本身。这意味着代理的观察结果由三元组 O = ⟨V E X⟩、、表示，分别代表节
点、边和节点特征。重要的是，我们不假设代理对网络有完全的可见性。观察中提供的图可能
缺少关于主机是否被攻破、攻击者可能用来在网络中横向移动的可能路径等信息，因此 O ⊆ S。
动作：遵循Janisch等人（2020）的模型，我们将每个游戏建模为一个由对象（或节点）
组成的系统，这些对象之间具有关系（或边）。动作可以对节点的一个子集执行以改变环
境。因此，对于每个可执行节点 vi ∈ Va ⊆ V，给定一个动作空间 A = {a0, ..., an}，动作被
表示为对这些节点的函数， an(vi)。这构成了环境 A ⊗ Va的总动作空间。通过将动作表示
为离散对象的函数，而不是表格方法（Watkins&Dayan，1992）所使用的固定数组，我
们可以通过改变集合Va的大小来自由增加或减少动作空间，而无需重新训练。
动作的结果产生图编辑。这些编辑可能以节点或边的添加或删除的形式出现，或者改变节点的
特征。例如，动作 an(vi) 可能会创建一个连接到 vi的节点 vj；它可能改变与节点 vi相关联的特
征向量 xi ；或者它可能完全从图中移除节点 vi 。通过这种抽象，我们可以进一步扩展动作空间，
以包括作为 an(vi, vj)函数的边级动作，作用于可执行边 Ea。这项工作考虑了具有节点级和边级
动作的环境， A = AV ∪ AE。
4.2AGENT设计
为了结合图结构及其特征的信息，我们使用图神经网络（GNN）（Scarselli等人，2008）
来生成节点嵌入。我们采用图卷积网络（GCN）（Kipf&Welling，2016），因为它具有
表达能力，以及归纳能力。GCN的定义函数是
H(ℓ+1) = σ
 
D
1
2 AD
1
2 H(ℓ)W(ℓ) + b(ℓ)
(2)
其中A是图的邻接矩阵加上I。D是每个节点的度数，而W(ℓ) 和b(ℓ) 是可训练参数。对于
图中的每个节点，此函数对其邻居的特征进行平均，然后将输出通过一个单层的全连接非
线性神经网络层。使用k GCN层将编码每个节点k‑跳邻域的信息。在实践中，我们使用
PyTorchGeometric（Fey&Lenssen，2019）实现的更高效的消息传递范式。
智能体通过近端策略优化（PPO）（Schulman等人，2017）进行学习。行为者和评价者网络
都使用2层GCN创建节点嵌入Z。然后，嵌入通过额外的全连接层传递，以生成概率分布函数，
或行为者和评价者的状态值估计。我们评估了三种从节点嵌入转换为动作概率的方法。使用图
表示学习的术语，我们将这些方法称为归纳或演绎（Hamilton等人，2017）。
传递模型运作方式与早期的表格式强化学习方法类似。如图1所示，它们将节点嵌入拼接成一个固定大小的向量，
并将其通过传统神经网络处理，生成一个大小为|Va| · |A|的向量。这种方法无法推广到新的拓扑结构。然而，由
于传递模型通常优于归纳模型（Lachaud等人，2022年），它可作为展示该领域关系偏差最大潜力的基础。
4


--- PAGE 5 ---
topologies. However, as transductive models tend to outperform inductive ones (Lachaud et al.,
2022), it serves as a basis to demonstrate the maximum potential of relational bias in this domain.
For inductive models, the embeddings for each node must be processed in an order- and length-
invariant way. The simplest way to do this is illustrated in Figure 2. The model passes each node
embedding independently through a fully connected layer, and the output is then flattened. The
actor-network uses the softmax of the flattened output to directly calculate action probabilities (e.g.,
vi,j represents the log-odds of taking actionjon nodei). If more actionable nodes are added to the
graph, the inductive GNN will output a|V ∪ V ′| × |A|dimensional matrix, which can be interpreted
in the same way without retraining, thus allowing for full inductivity. The critic-network, which
attempts to evaluate the value of the current global state, projects each row ofZ Va into a single
dimension, then pools the batch into a single value. This method, which we refer to as thenaive
inductive modelis simplistic, but we will show it is also powerful. However, it has a major drawback:
node embeddings do not have the context of other nodes’ states if they are greater thankhops away.
To address this, we adopt a modified form of the attention-based node pooling proposed by Janisch
et al. (2020). This modification occurs in the node embedding step of the model. In each layer
of the GCN, the embeddings for all nodesZare calculated. Then, the embeddings of actionable
nodes,Z Va, are extracted and concatenated with a global graph state vectorg. We then calculate the
updated global state vector of the graph as
g′ =g+ϕ g

POOLi∈Va {ϕv(g,z i)·ϕ a(g,z i)}

(3)
whereϕ v, andϕ g are fully connected networks, andϕ a is a fully connected network with softmax
activation. POOL represents any pooling function that is order-invariant. The original work suggests
sum-pooling, but this can cause issues when testing in environments that have many more nodes than
the training environment. In this work, we use mean- or max-pooling to address this problem.
The actor-network concatenates the finalgvector to each of the final node embeddings, then uses
the final vectors in the inductive method we previously described. This ensures that each node
embedding contains information about all other nodes in the network, which allows them to weigh
the importance of taking an action upon themselves, vs. an action somewhere else in the network.
The critic network, as it is calculating the global value of the network’s state, uses thegvector
directly as input. We refer to this method as theattention inductive model.
Inductive models also supportedge-level actions. We formulate the probability of taking an action on
an edge as the output of an additional function that takes the source and destination node embeddings
as input. In this work, to calculate the probability of taking an edge action, we calculatef(Zsrc⊙Zdst)
wheref(·)is a fully connected layer with|A E |-dimensional output,⊙represents the Hadamard
product, andZis the set of node embeddings such that⟨src,dst⟩ ∈ E a. The output off(·)is then
concatenated to the flattened probability vector of node-level actions.
5 EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate our agent in three environments of increasing complexity. In each environment, our
agent (the blue agent) defends the network from an attacker (the red agent). The threat model
between each environment varies, but broadly, we assume that the system can be modeled as a
graph of hosts whose security states transition over time between “safe” and “compromised.” These
transitions are governed by both attacker and defender actions. The specific transition dynamics
vary by environment but are always represented within the environment’s MDP. We assume that the
attacker begins with root access to a single host and can take actions that increase the likelihood
of compromising additional hosts. The attacker operates under partial observability of the network,
must scan to discover reachable hosts, and lacks prior knowledge of the topology. The defender
also has partial observability, though the scope and quality of information vary by environment. In
each timestep, both attacker and defender select actions simultaneously. The attacker’s objective is
to maximize the number of compromised hosts over a finite time horizon, while the defender aims
to minimize this quantity.
Table 1 summarizes important details of each environment. For the first experiment, we analyze
the Yawning Titan environment (Collyer et al., 2022), one of the first works to frame RL-based
5
然而，由于传递模型通常优于归纳模型（Lachaud等人，2022年），它可作为展示该领域关系偏差
最大潜力的基础。
对于归纳模型，每个节点的嵌入必须以不依赖于顺序和长度的方式进行处理。最简单的方
法如图2所示。模型独立地将每个节点嵌入传递给全连接层，然后对输出进行展平。行动者
网络使用展平输出的softmax直接计算行动概率（例如，vi、j 表示在节点 i上采取行动 j 的
对数概率）。如果向图中添加更多可行动的节点，归纳GNN将输出一个 |V ∪ V ′| × |A| 维的
矩阵，无需重新训练即可以相同的方式解释，从而实现完全的归纳性。评价网络尝试评估
当前全局状态的价值，将ZVa 的每一行投影到单个维度，然后将批次聚合为单个值。我们
称这种方法为朴素归纳模型，它虽然简单，但我们将证明它同样强大。然而，它有一个主
要缺点：如果节点之间的距离大于 k 跳，节点嵌入将没有其他节点状态的信息。
为此，我们采用Janisch等人（2020）提出的基于注意力的节点池化方法的改进形式。这
种修改发生在模型的节点嵌入步骤中。在GCN的每一层中，都会计算所有节点Z的嵌入。
然后，提取可操作节点ZVa的嵌入，并将其与全局图状态向量g连接。我们随后计算图更
新的全局状态向量，
g′ = g + ϕg

POOLi∈Va {ϕv(g, zi) · ϕa(g, zi)}

(3)
其中 ϕv、 ϕg 是完全连接的网络，而ϕa 是带有softmax激活的完全连接网络。POOL表示任
何顺序不变的池化函数。原始工作建议使用求和池化，但在测试环境中节点数量远多于训练环
境时，这可能会引发问题。在这项工作中，我们使用均值或最大池化来解决此问题。
行为者网络将最终的g向量连接到每个最终的节点嵌入，然后使用我们先前描述的归纳方
法中的最终向量。这确保了每个节点嵌入都包含网络中所有其他节点的信息，从而允许它
们权衡在自身上采取行动的重要性，与在网络其他地方采取行动的重要性。评价者网络在
计算网络状态的全局值时，直接使用g向量作为输入。我们将此方法称为注意力归纳模型。
归纳模型也支持边缘级别的动作。我们将执行边缘动作的概率表述为额外函数的输出，该函数
以源节点和目标节点嵌入为输入。在本工作中，为计算执行边缘动作的概率，我们计算
f (Zsrc⊙Zdst)，其中f(·)是一个具有|AE |维输出的全连接层， ⊙ 表示哈达玛积，而Z是满足
⟨src dst⟩ ∈ Ea的节点嵌入集合，.然后， f(·)的输出与节点级别动作的扁平化概率向量连接起
来。
5实验
我们在三个复杂度递增的环境中评估我们的智能体。在每个环境中，我们的智能体（蓝色智能
体）防御网络免受攻击者（红色智能体）的攻击。每个环境之间的威胁模型各不相同，但总体
而言，我们假设系统可以建模为安全状态随时间在“安全”和“受感染”之间转换的主机图。
这些转换受攻击者和防御者动作的共同影响。具体的转换动态因环境而异，但始终在环境的多
智能体决策过程（MDP）中表示。我们假设攻击者最初拥有单个主机的根访问权限，并且可以
采取增加感染更多主机可能性的动作。攻击者在网络的部分可观察性下运行，必须扫描以发现
可达的主机，并且缺乏对拓扑结构的先验知识。防御者也有部分可观察性，但信息的范围和质
量因环境而异。在每个时间步，攻击者和防御者同时选择动作。攻击者的目标是最大化在有限
时间范围内受感染主机的数量，而防御者的目标是最小化这个数量。
表1总结了每个环境的详细信息。在第一个实验中，我们分析了YawningTitan环境（Collyer等人，
2022年），这是最早将基于RL的网络防御问题框架化为图问题之一的工作。
5


--- PAGE 6 ---
network defense as a graph problem. 2 Next, we evaluate on the CAGE Challenge 2 (CC2) envi-
ronment (CAGE, 2022), which has a more complex action space and a more fine-grained reward
function. Finally, we test our agent in the very complex CC4 environment (TTCP CAGE Working
Group, 2023). In addition to being the largest network we test our agent on, it is also a multi-agent
RL environment. Due to the page limit, please refer to the appendix for additional details on training
configurations, ablation studies, and the details of the testing environments.
Table 1: Evaluation Environments
Network Size Per-node actions Per-edge actions Blue Agents Red Agents
Yawning Titan 10-100 3 0 1 1
CC2 13 10 0 1 1
CC4 32-128 4 2 5 1-5
5.1 NETWORKSIMULATION WITHYAWNINGTITANENVIRONMENT
This environment is a two-player CMDP where a heuristic red agent attempts to spread through
a computer network, and our model attempts to defend it. The computer network is represented
as a random Erd ˝os-R´enyi graph (Erd ˝os et al., 1960). Each node represents a computer, and edges
represent their ability to communicate. Details of the experimental setup and the state-action space
of this environment are provided in the Appendix.
We use the same training configuration as the original work (Collyer et al., 2022). We train models
for 5 million steps on a single random graph, then sample 50 new graphs and evaluate the models
in these new environments without retraining for 10 episodes each. We compare ourTransductive,
Naive, andAttention Inductivemodels to the two approaches from the prior work:Standard Ob-
servationsandGraph Observations. We also evaluate the architecture proposed by Doorman et al.
(2022): a struc2vec-based GNN (Ribeiro et al., 2017) that uses sum aggregation to produce a global
graph vector that is used in a similar way to our self-attention model. Their original approach was
only designed for environments with a single action, but we modified the output to produce likeli-
hoods for|A|actions per-node. Their architecture is similar to ours, but their approach uses a DQN
rather than PPO. It is included here to compare the utility of both RL strategies for this problem.
Table 2 reports the average reward of all 500 episodes, normalized such that 1.0 is a theoretically
perfect score if no hosts were compromised at all.
Table 2: Mean score on random environments (higher is better)
|V|=10|V|=20|V|=40
Standard Observations 0.2511±0.017 0.2310±0.013 0.1683±0.010
Graph Observations 0.2090±0.005 0.3037±0.013 0.2047±0.013
Doorman et al. (2022) 0.7379±0.011 -0.0385±0.011 -0.0300±0.007
Transductive 0.4246±0.011 -0.1327±0.000 -0.0966±0.000
Naive Inductive 0.2681±0.036 0.5439±0.012 0.9308±0.004
Attention Inductive0.8167±0.0090.5634±0.0120.9955±0.002
Unsurprisingly, the transductive model is unable to generalize to new environments. It is likely that it
overfit to the node ordering it observed during training. Both the naive and attention-based inductive
models more than double the tabular methods’ scores. When compared to the other GNN-based
technique, as environments grew more complex, the model became less able to generalize to new
graphs. Despite achieving scores comprable to our models during training, when evaluated on the
new graphs, the Doorman et al. (2022) models failed to generalize. This may be explained by PPO’s
greater exploration ability, allowing it to find more optimal policies in more complex environments
compared to DQN De La Fuente & Guerra (2024). It could also be that the prior work’s choice
of sum for the readout function in their model did not generalize to graphs with varied densities,
leading to oversmoothing. We also observe that when|V|= 40, the attention-based model appears
to have found a nearly perfect strategy. We hypothesize that because it was trained in a more complex
environment, the observations it received during training were more varied, and forced the model to
find a more general policy, while models in smaller environments became more overfit.
2We select this work rather than Ridley (2018) because it has an additional focus on domain generalization.
6
接下来，我们在CAGE挑战2（CC2）环境（CAGE，2022年）上进行评估，该环境具有更复杂
的动作空间和更细粒度的奖励函数。最后，我们在非常复杂的CC4环境（TTCPCAGE工作组，
2023年）中测试我们的智能体。除了是我们测试智能体的最大网络之外，它还是一个多智能体
RL环境。由于页数限制，有关训练配置、消融研究和测试环境详细信息的更多信息，请参阅附
录。
表1：评估环境
网络规模 每节点操作 每边操作 蓝色代理 红色代理
打哈欠的巨人 10‑100 3 0 1 1
CC2 13 10 0 1 1
CC4 32‑128 4 2 5 1-5
5.1使用YAWNINGTITAN环境的网络模拟
该环境是一个双人CMDP，其中启发式红色智能体试图通过计算机网络传播，而我们的模
型试图进行防御。计算机网络表示为一个随机的Erd˝os‑R´enyi图（Erd˝os等人，1960年）。
每个节点代表一台计算机，边代表它们通信的能力。实验设置的详细信息和该环境的状态‑
动作空间在附录中提供。
我们使用与原始工作（Collyer等人，2022年）相同的训练配置。我们在单个随机图上训练模型500
万步，然后采样50个新图，并在这些新环境中评估模型，每个环境不重新训练10个回合。我们将我们
的Transductive、Naive和AttentionInductive模型与先前工作中的两种方法进行比较：标准观察
和图观察。我们还评估了Doorman等人（2022年）提出的架构：一个基于struc2vec的GNN（
Ribeiro等人，2017年），它使用求和聚合来生成一个全局图向量，该向量以与我们的自注意力模型
类似的方式使用。他们的原始方法仅设计用于具有单个动作的环境，但我们修改了输出以生成每个节
点的 |A| 个动作的可能性。他们的架构与我们的相似，但他们的方法使用DQN而不是PPO。它被包
括在内，以比较这两种RL策略在此问题上的效用。表2报告了所有500个回合的平均奖励，已归一化，
使得1.0是一个理论上完美的分数，如果没有任何主机被攻破。
表2：随机环境下的平均得分（越高越好）
|V| = 10 |V| = 20 |V| = 40
标准观测 0.2511 ± 0.017 0.2310 ± 0.013 0.1683 ± 0.010
图观测 0.2090 ± 0.005 0.3037 ± 0.013 0.2047 ± 0.013
Doorman等人(2022) 0.7379 ± 0.011 ‑0.0385 ± 0.011 ‑0.0300 ± 0.007
归纳学习 0.4246 ± 0.011 ‑0.1327 ± 0.000 ‑0.0966 ± 0.000
朴素归纳学习 0.2681 ± 0.036 0.5439 ± 0.012 0.9308 ± 0.004
注意力归纳 0.8167 ± 0.009 0.5634 ± 0.012 0.9955 ± 0.002
毫不奇怪，归纳模型无法泛化到新环境。它很可能在训练过程中过拟合了其观察到的节点顺序。
朴素模型和基于注意力的归纳模型的成绩都超过了表格方法的二倍以上。与其他基于GNN的技
术相比，当环境变得更加复杂时，该模型泛化到新图的能力减弱。尽管Doorman等人（2022）
的模型在训练期间取得了与我们的模型相当的成绩，但在新图上评估时，它们却无法泛化。这
可能是由于PPO具有更强的探索能力，使其能够在比DQN（DeLaFuente&Guerra，2024）
更复杂的环境中找到更优的策略。也可能是由于先前工作的模型在读取函数中选择的求和方式
未能泛化到密度不同的图，导致过度平滑。我们还观察到，当 |V | = 40时，基于注意力的模型
似乎找到了一个近乎完美的策略。我们假设，由于它在更复杂的环境中训练，训练期间接收到
的观察结果更加多样化，这迫使模型找到一个更通用的策略，而小环境中的模型则更容易过拟
合。
2我们选择这项工作而不是Ridley(2018)，因为它在领域泛化方面有额外的关注。
6


--- PAGE 7 ---
To further demonstrate the generalization of the policies our models learn, we evaluate the high-
scoring|V|= 40models in environments with different numbers of nodes than they were trained in.
Unlike the prior work, which cannot generalize to different environment sizes, our approach is fully
inductive. As before, we evaluated the model without retraining 10 times on 50 randomly sampled
graphs for each environment size. Figure 3 plots the scores of the naive and attention-based models
in these different environments.
Both models, even in the largest environment we tested, still more than double the scores of the
Euclidean models in the simplest environments. The attention-based model achieves higher scores
overall: its strategy remains near-perfect in environments where|V| ≤50. However, it is more
sensitive to the growing complexity of larger environments than the naive model is. While the naive
model has slightly lower scores than the attention-based model, it appears that its simpler design
allowed it to remain generalizable for much more complex environments. Its score also decays
as complexity increases but at a much lower rate than the attention-based model. These results
are likely a result of the No Free Lunch theorem (Wolpert & Macready, 1997), which states that
any increase in a model’s performance in one problem domain must be accounted for by a deficit
elsewhere. These results seem to indicate that the cost of good model generality may be lower
performance in easier regions of the environment-space, but consistent performance across more of
the space.
Figure 3: Scores attained by the|V|= 40GNN models on graphs of different sizes.
5.2 CAGE-2: A SIMULATEDENTERPRISENETWORK
The CAGE Challenge-2 (CC2) was a reinforcement learning contest that aimed to “support the
development of AI tactics, techniques, and procedures...for autonomous cyber operations” (CAGE,
2022). In this scenario, the red agent is trying to reach and compromise a specific, important host
called OpServer0. CC2 provides two heuristic-based red agents: B-Line, and Meander. The B-Line
agent knows the fastest route from its starting machine to its target, OpServer0, and will take the
same path of lateral movements through the network with little variation. The Meander agent is
slower, performing a breadth-first search through each subnet before moving to the next subnet.
Specifics about the state-action space and reward function are provided in the Appendix.
Training:All GNN models are trained using the same hyperparameters and settings. For each
episode, a red agent is selected randomly with even probability. We then simulate 100 timesteps.
After 100 episodes, the agent’s weights are updated according to the PPO algorithm (Schulman
et al., 2017). The agent only uses 4 epochs per update and otherwise uses the same hyperparameters
as StableBaselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021). Both the actor and critic networks use two-layer GCNs
with 256- and 64-dimensional layers. 3 The attention-pooling models use a 256-dimensional global
vector with mean-pooling. All models were trained for 100k, 100-step episodes.
Default Game:Each agent was evaluated on 100 episodes with lengths{30,50,100}against one of
the heuristic red agents. The average score of these episodes is reported in Table 3. We compare our
models to the top two performers from the original competition:Cardiff(Hannay, 2022), an HPPO
approach which trains expert agents against the B-line and Meander red agents, and heuristically
decides which model to use, andKeeping it RL(Wolk et al., 2022) an ensemble-of-ensembles of
PPO models trained against different red agents. These models outperform ours in the competition
evaluation, but not by a wide margin.
As expected, because the evaluation environment is the same as the training environment, the trans-
ductive model achieves the best average score of our models. However, the attention-based model
3An ablation study on this hyperparameter is provided in the Appendix.
7
为了进一步展示我们模型学习的策略的泛化能力，我们在节点数量与我们训练时不同的环
境中评估了高分的 |V| = 40模型。与先前工作不同，后者无法泛化到不同大小的环境，我
们的方法是完全归纳的。与之前一样，我们对每个环境大小在50个随机采样的图上重新训
练10次模型。图3绘制了朴素模型和基于注意力的模型在这些不同环境中的成绩。
两种模型，即使在我们在测试中最大的环境中，其得分仍然比欧几里得模型在简单环境中
的得分高出两倍以上。基于注意力的模型总体上实现了更高的得分：其策略在 |V| ≤ 50的
环境中保持近乎完美。然而，它对更大环境复杂性的增长比朴素模型更敏感。虽然朴素模
型的得分略低于基于注意力的模型，但其简单的设计似乎使其能够保持对更复杂环境的泛
化能力。随着复杂性的增加，它的得分也会下降，但下降速率远低于基于注意力的模型。
这些结果可能是“没有免费午餐”定理（Wolpert&Macready,1997）的结果，该定理
指出，模型在某一问题域的性能提高必须由其他方面的缺陷来弥补。这些结果表明，良好
的模型泛化能力的成本可能是环境空间中较易区域性能的降低，但在更大部分空间中保持
一致的性能。
图3：不同规模图上 |V| = 40 GNN模型的得分。
5.2CAGE‑2：一个模拟的企业网络
CAGE挑战赛‑2（CC2）是一项强化学习竞赛，旨在“支持人工智能战术、技术和程序...用
于自主网络作战”（CAGE，2022年）。在这个场景中，红色代理试图到达并攻陷一个特
定的、重要的主机，称为OpServer0。CC2提供了两个基于启发式的红色代理：B‑Line和
Meander。B‑Line代理知道从其起始机器到目标OpServer0的最快路线，并且会以几乎不
变的路径在网络中进行横向移动。Meander代理较慢，在移动到下一个子网之前，会对每
个子网进行广度优先搜索。状态‑动作空间和奖励函数的详细信息在附录中提供。
训练：所有GNN模型都使用相同的超参数和设置进行训练。在每个回合中，以相等的概率随机选择
一个红色代理。然后模拟100个时间步。在100个回合后，根据PPO算法（Schulman等人，2017年）
更新代理的权重。代理每次更新只使用4个epoch，否则使用与StableBaselines3（Raffin等人，
2021年）相同的超参数。演员网络和评价网络都使用两层GCN，维度分别为256和64。3 注意力池化
模型使用256维的全局向量，并采用均值池化。所有模型都训练了100k个、每个回合100个时间步的
样本。
默认游戏：每个代理都在100个长度为{30, 50, 100} 的回合中与其中一个启发式红色代理进行评估。
这些回合的平均分数报告在表3中。我们将我们的模型与原始竞赛中排名前两位的表现者进行比较：
Cardiff（Hannay，2022年），一种HPPO方法，该方法通过针对B线和Meander红色代理训
练专家代理，并启发式地决定使用哪个模型，以及KeepingitRL（Wolk等人，2022年），这是一
个由针对不同红色代理训练的PPO模型组成的集成。这些模型在竞赛评估中优于我们的模型，但优
势并不明显。
正如预期，由于评估环境和训练环境相同，归纳模型在我们的模型中取得了最佳平均分。然而，基于
注意力的模型
3关于此超参数的消融研究提供在附录中。
7


--- PAGE 8 ---
Table 3: Scores on the CC2 Environment (smaller is better)
30 Steps 50 Steps 100 Steps
Total B-Line Meander B-Line Meander B-Line Meander
Cardiff-54.57±0.43-3.47 -5.64-6.41-8.69-13.76 -16.60
Keeping it RL -56.90±0.59 -3.48 -6.47-5.85-10.33-11.39-19.38
Transductive -57.30±0.65 -3.58 -6.25 -6.59 -9.86 -14.09 -16.94
Naive Inductive -62.08±0.63 -4.16 -7.20 -7.21 -10.90 -15.15 -17.45
Attention Inductive -60.14±0.66 -4.39 -6.99 -7.68 -9.80 -14.80-16.48
Figure 4: Evaluation against unseen red agents
 Figure 5: Evaluation of models trained against a
single red agent tested against both red agents
scores almost as high in several instances, and even better in the 100-step game against Meander.
Additionally, the difference in performance between the inductive and transductive models is minor.
Adversary Generalization:While the top models are very good at this specific task, they are also
very brittle and overfit to the environment. In a realistic scenario, we expect the adversary to act in
unpredictable ways. We create two new red agents: Sleepy-Meander, and Sleepy-B-Line. These are
slower red agents; the only difference in their strategy is that at every turn they have a 50% chance of
selecting no-op instead of the move the non-sleepy agent would have taken. Compare this to training
against automated attacker agents, and the defense agent encountering a slower, human attacker for
the first time. We evaluate our transductive model and the CardiffUni model against these new
agents with no retraining. The results in Figure 4 show that this minor, realistic perturbation caused
the Cardiff agent to experience a 1,982% decrease in its score in the worst case.
In comparison, utilizing relational inductive bias allows our agents to learn more generalizable poli-
cies, which is evident in how they can take advantage of the weaknesses of new attackers. For
example, because the Sleepy B-Line agent is 50% slower, our model achieves a 50% better score.
Against the slower meander agent, the Cardiff HPPO agent selects the expert policy for B-Line and
suffers immensely. On the other hand, our agent applies its more universal policy that it learned from
graph analysis and scores slightly better, or about equal to before. These results show that relational
inductive bias allows for generalization to new attackers; next, we will evaluate our agents’ ability
to generalize to new environments.
In another experiment, we trained our blue agents only against a single red agent before testing them
against both red agents. The results of this study are shown in Figure 5. We found that against
unseen agents, our models perform comparably to the HPPO agent evaluated by Wolk et al. (2022).
Interestingly, the agent trained against only Meander scores slightly lower against the Meander
agent, compared to the baseline agent that was trained against both red agents. These results suggest
that the more general policy the default agent learned to defend against both red agents is stronger
than the locally optimal policy the Meander-specialist discovered to defend against a single agent.
Domain Generalization:In addition to new adversaries, it is important to evaluate how agents
behave when faced with new environments. This concern about generalizability was shared by
Wolk et al. (2022), so they devised 3 new scenarios to evaluate their models in new environments.
Scenarios 3 and 4 shuffle the order that hosts are indexed in two of the subnets; Scenario 5 adds
paths from each machine in one subnet to two hosts in another subnet. These changes are made
to the configuration file that generates the environment and are not explicitly communicated to the
8
表3：CC2环境得分（越低越好）
30步 50步 100步
总计 B线 蜿蜒
B‑Line
蜿蜒
B‑Line
蜿蜒
卡迪夫 ‑54.57 ± 0.43 -3.47 -5.64 -6.41 -8.69 -13.76 -16.60
保持真实 ‑56.90 ± 0.59 -3.48 -6.47 -5.85 -10.33 -11.39 -19.38
转导式 ‑57.30 ± 0.65 -3.58 -6.25 -6.59 -9.86 -14.09 -16.94
朴素归纳式 ‑62.08 ± 0.63 -4.16 -7.20 -7.21 -10.90 -15.15 -17.45
注意力归纳 ‑60.14 ± 0.66 -4.39 -6.99 -7.68 -9.80 -14.80 -16.48
图4：对未见过的红方智能体进行评估
 图5：针对单个红方智能体训练的模型，在同时面
对两个红方智能体时进行评估
在几个实例中的得分几乎一样高，甚至在对抗Meander的100步游戏中表现更好。此外，归纳模型和
归纳模型之间的性能差异很小。
对抗泛化：虽然顶尖模型在这个特定任务上表现非常出色，但它们也非常脆弱，并且过度拟合
了环境。在现实场景中，我们预期对手会以不可预测的方式行动。我们创建了两个新的红方智
能体：Sleepy‑Meander和Sleepy‑B‑Line。这些是速度较慢的红方智能体；它们策略上的唯
一区别在于，在每一步都有50%的概率选择无操作，而不是非睡眠智能体本会采取的行动。将
其与针对自动化攻击智能体进行训练的情况进行比较，以及防御智能体首次遇到较慢的人类攻
击者。我们使用这些新智能体对转导模型和CardiffUni模型进行评估，且不进行重新训练。图
4中的结果表明，这种微小、现实的扰动导致Cardiff智能体在最坏情况下的得分下降了1,982%。
相比之下，利用关系归纳偏差使我们的智能体能够学习更具泛化能力的策略，这一点体现
在它们如何利用新攻击者的弱点。例如，由于SleepyB‑Line智能体速度较慢50%，我们
的模型得分提高了50%。面对较慢的meander智能体，CardiffHPPO智能体选择
B‑Line的专家策略并遭受巨大损失。另一方面，我们的智能体应用了从图分析中学习到的
更通用的策略，得分略好，或与之前相当。这些结果表明关系归纳偏差允许泛化到新攻击
者；接下来，我们将评估我们的智能体泛化到新环境的能力。
在另一个实验中，我们仅用单个红色智能体训练我们的蓝色智能体，然后再用两个红色智能体测试它
们。这项研究的结果如图5所示。我们发现，面对未见过的智能体，我们的模型表现与Wolk等人
（2022）评估的HPPO智能体相当。有趣的是，仅与Meander训练的智能体在Meander智能体
上的得分略低于与两个红色智能体训练的基线智能体。这些结果表明，默认智能体学习到的更通用策
略（用于防御两个红色智能体）比Meander专家发现的局部最优策略（用于防御单个智能体）更强。
领域泛化：除了新的攻击者，还需要评估智能体在面对新环境时的行为。关于泛化性的担忧被
Wolk等人（2022年）所共享，因此他们设计了3个新场景来评估他们的模型在新环境中的表现。
场景3和4打乱了两个子网中主机索引的顺序；场景5在每个子网中的每台机器添加了到另一个子
网的两个主机的路径。这些更改是在生成环境的配置文件中进行的，并且没有明确地传达给智
能体。
8


--- PAGE 9 ---
Figure 6: Change in average score under new scenarios proposed by “Keeping it RL” Wolk et al.
(2022)
Figure 7: Change in inductive agents’ scores in new environments with different numbers of hosts.
agents. For all generalization experiments, we evaluate agents with the parameters learned from the
default CC2 environment without retraining.
Figure 6 shows how different agents respond in these new scenarios. We note that even our trans-
ductive model out-performs the prior works, highlighting the utility of relational inductive bias. We
further observe that, as the theoretical backing predicts, the inductive models are unaffected by the
scenarios that change the ordering of nodes.
The scenarios proposed by Wolk et al. (2022) are a good starting point, but we feel that their changes
do not go far enough. In addition to these scenarios, we also evaluate what happens when every
index in the graph is perturbed. We observed that both inductive models’ scores changed by<2%
for the index perturbation experiments, which was well within the standard error we observed in
the previous experiments. However, the transductive model’s average score dropped to -1,950.72.4
From this, we conclude that the transductive model is also overfit.
Finally, we evaluate several new scenarios. These scenarios each involve a different number of hosts
than were present in the training graph, so the tabular methods that we evaluated previously and the
transductive model cannot run without retraining. Figure 7 shows how changing the environment
affects the inductive agents’ abilities to defend the network. In the first four scenarios, we simply add
or delete a node from a subnet. These minor perturbations in the network affect our agents very little.
In both instances where a host is added, the agents’ scores decrease slightly, but this is expected,
as the attack surface increases with every additional host. Removing an enterprise server negatively
affects the naive model, while having very little effect on the self-attention model. The naive model
has only a local view of each node, so it does not know when to prioritize other subnets. As a result,
it rarely attempts to defend the user subnet, opting instead to defend the Enterprise subnetwork. This
inability to shift its attention likely explains the score decrease.
In the last scenario, where the user subnetwork is filled, both agents have difficulty defending the
network, as the attack surface is nearly doubled: 8 new users are added. Like the Yawning Titan
experiments, the increase in the size of the environment affects the self-attention network more than
the inductive network, which highlights the difficulty and importance of balancing good scores in
simpler areas of the problem space with generality across regions with greater complexity.
4For reference, selecting actions randomly will produce a score of 1999.41.
9
图6：“保持RL”Wolk等人（2022）提出的新场景下的平均分数变化
图7：不同主机数量新环境中的归纳代理分数变化
对于所有泛化实验，我们都使用从默认CC2环境中学习到的参数来评估智能体，而无需重新训练。
图6显示了不同代理在这些新场景中的响应方式。我们注意到，即使我们的传导模型也比以
往的工作表现更好，突出了关系归纳偏差的效用。我们进一步观察到，正如理论支持所预
测的那样，归纳模型不受节点顺序变化的场景影响。
Wolk等人（2022）提出的新场景是一个不错的起点，但我们认为他们的改变还不够彻底。除
了这些场景外，我们还评估了当图中每个索引扰动时会发生什么。我们观察到，在索引扰动实
验中，两个归纳模型的分数变化了 < 2%，这在我们之前的实验中观察到的标准误差范围内。然
而，传导模型的平均分数降至‑1,950.72.4由此，我们得出结论，传导模型也存在过拟合。
最后，我们评估了几个新的场景。这些场景中的主机数量与训练图中的不同，因此我们之
前评估的表格方法和传导模型都需要重新训练才能运行。图7展示了环境变化如何影响归纳
代理防御网络的能力。在前四个场景中，我们只是从子网中添加或删除一个节点。这些网
络中的微小扰动对代理影响很小。在添加主机的两种情况下，代理的得分略有下降，但这
可以预期，因为每增加一个主机，攻击面都会增加。移除企业服务器对朴素模型产生负面
影响，而对自注意力模型影响很小。朴素模型只能看到每个节点的局部视图，因此不知道
何时优先考虑其他子网。结果，它很少尝试防御用户子网，而是选择防御企业子网。这种
无法转移注意力的能力很可能解释了得分下降。
在最后一个场景中，当用户子网络被填满时，两个代理都难以防御网络，因为攻击面几乎
翻了一番：增加了8个新用户。与YawningTitan实验类似，环境规模的增加对自注意力网
络的影响大于归纳网络，这突出了在问题空间中较简单的区域平衡良好分数与在具有更大
复杂性的区域保持泛化能力的难度和重要性。
4参考而言，随机选择动作会产生1999.41的分数。
9


--- PAGE 10 ---
Figure 8: Action distributions of five CC4 agents. Each was trained independently, but interestingly,
agents defending similar networks, e.g., Agents 2, 4, and 5 found similar strategies. Agent 1 de-
fended the largest subnet, where it learned to analyze more frequently for better information about
the large network it defended, while the latter four focused on enforcing firewall rules.
5.3 CAGE-4: MULTI-AGENTREINFORCEMENTLEARNING
The CAGE Challenge-4 (CC4) (TTCP CAGE Working Group, 2023) extends CC2 into a Multi-
Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) task. Now, multiple agents each defend one of five seg-
mented networks, with actions and objectives similar to CC2. One key difference for this envi-
ronment is its randomly initialized topology. During each episode, subnets are generated with 1-6
servers and 3-10 user hosts. Because networks are variably sized, prior transductive and tabular-
based solutions will not work.
The action space for this environment is similar to CC2. Some of the node-level actions from
CC2 are merged into a single action, and there are two new edge-level actions: AllowTraffic and
BlockTraffic, which create or delete edges between subnet nodes. Specifics about the state-action
space and reward function are in the supplemental material.
We train five independent instances of our self-attention inductive model in this environment using
the same configuration as in CC2 to measure our approach’s applicability to MARL tasks. Each
agent independently learns a unique policy for the subnet it defends. We illustrate the action distri-
bution used by each agent in Figure 8.
Our approach was the highest-performing non-heuristic agent submitted to the CC4 competition
and finished in fifth place overall (Kiely et al., 2025). This result highlights the wide applicability
of graph-based RL in fields beyond simple two-player games. Our agent’s ability to adapt to vari-
able network sizes and topologies allowed us to apply it to this new challenge with only minimal
changes to accommodate the new action space. In a metareview of the competition, the competition
runners identified the inability to adapt to the random initialization of the environment as the main
detriment for other MARL approaches that were submitted (Kiely et al., 2025). Representing ac-
tions as functions upon nodes and edges allowed our approach to naturally adapt to this challenge.
These results show great promise for future research into multi-agent reinforcement learning with
relational inductive bias.
6 DISCUSSION
Limitations. In this work we evaluate our approach on relatively small graphs. In all experiments,
the bottleneck for throughput is the environment, rather than the model. However, with larger net-
works, more optimizations may be required to process observations at a reasonable speed. Another
limitation is the leap from sim-to-real. Further engineering is required to address how the simplistic
actions that agents take would be translated into real-world cybersecurity rules. Additionally, further
analysis needs to be done to determine the utility of ACD agents, and how they would impact the
humans using the networks they defend.
Future Work. We only consider actions that manifest as node-level edits, with the exception of
some simple edge-level actions in CC4. Future work on efficient representation of edge- and global-
level actions within a graph-based RL framework is a promising next step. Additionally, future work
could include new analysis on how to better implement intra-agent communication in MARL, and
studies into performance improvements.
10
图8：五个CC4智能体的动作分布。每个智能体都是独立训练的，但有趣的是，防御相似网络的智能
体（例如智能体2、4和5）发现了相似的策略。智能体1防御了最大的子网，它学会了更频繁地分析，
以获取有关其防御的大型网络更好的信息，而其他四个智能体则专注于执行防火墙规则。
5.3CAGE‑4：多智能体强化学习
CAGE挑战赛‑4（CC4）（TTCPCAGE工作组，2023年）将CC2扩展为多智能体强化学习（
MARL）任务。现在，多个代理各自防御五个分段网络中的一个，其动作和目标与CC2类似。
这个环境的一个关键区别是其随机初始化的拓扑结构。在每个回合中，子网会生成1‑6个服务器
和3‑10个用户主机。由于网络规模可变，先前的基于转导和表格的解决方案将无法工作。
此环境的动作空间与CC2类似。CC2的一些节点级动作被合并为一个动作，并且有两个新
的边缘级动作：AllowTraffic和BlockTraffic，它们在子网节点之间创建或删除边。状态‑
动作空间和奖励函数的详细信息在补充材料中。
我们使用与CC2相同的配置，在此环境中训练了五个独立的自注意力归纳模型实例，以衡
量我们的方法对MARL任务的适用性。每个智能体独立学习其防御子网的唯一策略。我们
在图8中说明了每个智能体使用的动作分布。
我们的方法是在CC4竞赛中提交的非启发式智能体中表现最佳的，最终获得第五名（
Kiely等人，2025年）。这一结果突显了基于图的强化学习在超越简单双人游戏的领域中的
广泛应用。我们的智能体能够适应可变网络大小和拓扑结构，使我们能够仅通过少量修改
以适应新的动作空间来应用它。在竞赛的元综述中，竞赛组织者指出，其他提交的
MARL方法的主要缺陷是无法适应环境的随机初始化（Kiely等人，2025年）。将动作表
示为作用于节点和边上的函数，使我们的方法能够自然地适应这一挑战。这些结果表明，
在具有关系归纳偏差的多智能体强化学习未来研究中，前景广阔。
6讨论
局限性。在这项工作中，我们在相对较小的图上评估了我们的方法。在所有实验中，吞吐
量的瓶颈是环境，而不是模型。然而，对于更大的网络，可能需要更多的优化来以合理的
速度处理观察结果。另一个局限性是从模拟到现实的跨越。需要进一步工程化来解决智能
体采取的简单动作如何转化为现实世界网络安全规则的问题。此外，还需要进行进一步分
析，以确定ACD智能体的效用，以及它们将如何影响使用它们防御网络的humans。
未来工作。我们仅考虑表现为节点级编辑的操作，CC4中的一些简单边级操作除外。在基
于图的强化学习框架内，对边级和全局级操作进行高效表示的未来工作是一个有前景的下
一步。此外，未来工作可以包括对如何在MARL中更好地实现智能体间通信的新分析，以
及性能改进的研究。
10


--- PAGE 11 ---
7 CONCLUSION
As automated cyber defense becomes a more plausible option for businesses and governments, the
high cost of retraining agents is an important constraint to consider. We have demonstrated that
our proposed agent can generalize and defend never-before-seen networks from attackers with novel
behavior. Because the agent understands the network as a graph and views its actions as graph edits,
its policy is less sensitive to environmental perturbation. We show that our graph-based approach
outperforms top RL approaches in many environments by a wide margin in the face of slight and
major environmental perturbations. Our results show that relational inductive bias is a powerful tool
for improving agents’ generalizability, and a step toward ACD in real-world systems.
REFERENCES
Paul Almasan, Jos´e Su´arez-Varela, Krzysztof Rusek, Pere Barlet-Ros, and Albert Cabellos-Aparicio.
Deep reinforcement learning meets graph neural networks: Exploring a routing optimization use
case.Computer Communications, 196:184–194, 2022.
Andy Applebaum, Camron Dennler, Patrick Dwyer, Marina Moskowitz, Harold Nguyen, Nicole
Nichols, Nicole Park, Paul Rachwalski, Frank Rau, Adrian Webster, et al. Bridging automated
to autonomous cyber defense: Foundational analysis of tabular q-learning. InProceedings of the
15th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, pp. 149–159, 2022.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al.
Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261,
2018.
Lashon B Booker and Scott A Musman. A model-based, decision-theoretic perspective on auto-
mated cyber response.arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08957, 2020.
CAGE. TTCP CAGE challenge 2. InAAAI-22 Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Cyber Security
(AICS), 2022.
Hasan Cam. Cyber resilience using autonomous agents and reinforcement learning. InArtificial
intelligence and machine learning for multi-domain operations applications II, volume 11413,
pp. 219–234. SPIE, 2020.
Xinzhong Chai, Yasen Wang, Chuanxu Yan, Yuan Zhao, Wenlong Chen, and Xiaolei Wang. Dq-
motag: deep reinforcement learning-based moving target defense against ddos attacks. In2020
IEEE Fifth International Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace (DSC), pp. 375–379. IEEE,
2020.
Ankur Chowdhary, Dijiang Huang, Abdulhakim Sabur, Neha Vadnere, Myong Kang, and Bruce
Montrose. Sdn-based moving target defense using multi-agent reinforcement learning. InPro-
ceedings of the first International Conference on Autonomous Intelligent Cyber defense Agents
(AICA 2021), Paris, France, pp. 15–16, 2021.
Josh Collyer, Alex Andrew, and Duncan Hodges. Acd-g: Enhancing autonomous cyber defense
agent generalization through graph embedded network representation. InInternational Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, 2022.
Neil De La Fuente and Daniel A Vidal Guerra. A comparative study of deep reinforcement learning
models: Dqn vs ppo vs a2c.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14151, 2024.
Christoffel Doorman, Victor-Alexandru Darvariu, Stephen Hailes, and Mirco Musolesi. Dynamic
network reconfiguration for entropy maximization using deep reinforcement learning. InLearning
on Graphs Conference, pp. 49–1. PMLR, 2022.
Taha Eghtesad, Yevgeniy V orobeychik, and Aron Laszka. Adversarial deep reinforcement learning
based adaptive moving target defense. InDecision and Game Theory for Security: 11th Interna-
tional Conference, GameSec 2020, College Park, MD, USA, October 28–30, 2020, Proceedings
11, pp. 58–79. Springer, 2020.
11
7结论
随着自动化网络防御成为企业和政府更可行的选择，重新训练智能体的高成本是一个重要
的约束因素。我们已经证明，我们提出的智能体可以泛化并防御从未见过的新网络攻击者。
由于智能体将网络视为图，并将其操作视为图编辑，因此其策略对环境扰动不太敏感。我
们表明，在轻微和重大环境扰动面前，我们的基于图的方法在许多环境中以很大优势优于
顶级强化学习方法。我们的结果表明，关系归纳偏差是提高智能体泛化能力的有力工具，
也是迈向现实系统中自动化网络防御的一步。
参考文献
Paul Almasan, Jos´e Su´arez-Varela, Krzysztof Rusek, Pere Barlet-Ros, and Albert Cabellos-Aparicio.
Deep reinforcement learning meets graph neural networks: Exploring a routing optimization use
case. Computer Communications, 196:184–194, 2022.
Andy Applebaum, Camron Dennler, Patrick Dwyer, Marina Moskowitz, Harold Nguyen, Nicole
Nichols, Nicole Park, Paul Rachwalski, Frank Rau, Adrian Webster, et al. Bridging automated
to autonomous cyber defense: Foundational analysis of tabular q-learning. In Proceedings of the
15th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, pp. 149–159, 2022.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al.
Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261,
2018.
Lashon B Booker and Scott A Musman. A model-based, decision-theoretic perspective on auto-
mated cyber response. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08957, 2020.
CAGE. TTCP CAGE challenge 2. In AAAI-22 Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Cyber Security
(AICS), 2022.
Hasan Cam. Cyber resilience using autonomous agents and reinforcement learning. In Artificial
intelligence and machine learning for multi-domain operations applications II, volume 11413,
pp. 219–234. SPIE, 2020.
Xinzhong Chai, Yasen Wang, Chuanxu Yan, Yuan Zhao, Wenlong Chen, and Xiaolei Wang. Dq-
motag: deep reinforcement learning-based moving target defense against ddos attacks. In 2020
IEEE Fifth International Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace (DSC), pp. 375–379. IEEE,
2020.
Ankur Chowdhary, Dijiang Huang, Abdulhakim Sabur, Neha Vadnere, Myong Kang, and Bruce
Montrose. Sdn-based moving target defense using multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the first International Conference on Autonomous Intelligent Cyber defense Agents
(AICA 2021), Paris, France, pp. 15–16, 2021.
Josh Collyer, Alex Andrew, and Duncan Hodges. Acd-g: Enhancing autonomous cyber defense
agent generalization through graph embedded network representation. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, 2022.
Neil De La Fuente and Daniel A Vidal Guerra. A comparative study of deep reinforcement learning
models: Dqn vs ppo vs a2c. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14151, 2024.
Christoffel Doorman, Victor-Alexandru Darvariu, Stephen Hailes, and Mirco Musolesi. Dynamic
network reconfiguration for entropy maximization using deep reinforcement learning. In Learning
on Graphs Conference, pp. 49–1. PMLR, 2022.
Taha Eghtesad, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, and Aron Laszka. Adversarial deep reinforcement learning
based adaptive moving target defense. In Decision and Game Theory for Security: 11th Interna-
tional Conference, GameSec 2020, College Park, MD, USA, October 28–30, 2020, Proceedings
11, pp. 58–79. Springer, 2020.
11


--- PAGE 12 ---
Paul Erd˝os, Alfr´ed R´enyi, et al. On the evolution of random graphs.Publ. math. inst. hung. acad.
sci, 5(1):17–60, 1960.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Myles Foley, Chris Hicks, Kate Highnam, and Vasilios Mavroudis. Autonomous network defence
using reinforcement learning. InProceedings of the 2022 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pp. 1252–1254, 2022.
Rohit Gangupantulu, Tyler Cody, Abdul Rahma, Christopher Redino, Ryan Clark, and Paul Park.
Crown jewels analysis using reinforcement learning with attack graphs. In2021 IEEE Symposium
Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2021.
Chungang Gao and Yongjie Wang. Reinforcement learning based self-adaptive moving target de-
fense against ddos attacks. InJournal of Physics: Conference Series, volume 1812, pp. 012039.
IOP Publishing, 2021.
Yazhuo Gao, Guomin Zhang, and Changyou Xing. A multiphase dynamic deployment mechanism
of virtualized honeypots based on intelligent attack path prediction.Security and Communication
Networks, 2021:1–15, 2021.
Stuart Geman, Elie Bienenstock, and Ren´e Doursat. Neural networks and the bias/variance dilemma.
Neural computation, 4(1):1–58, 1992.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jessica B Hamrick, Kelsey R Allen, Victor Bapst, Tina Zhu, Kevin R McKee, Joshua B Tenen-
baum, and Peter W Battaglia. Relational inductive bias for physical construction in humans and
machines.arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01203, 2018.
John Hannay. CardiffUni CAGE2 submission.https://github.com/john-cardiff/
-cyborg-cage-2, 2022.
Jarom´ır Janisch, Tom´aˇs Pevn`y, and Viliam Lis `y. Symbolic relational deep reinforcement learning
based on graph neural networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12462, 2020.
Elias Khalil, Hanjun Dai, Yuyu Zhang, Bistra Dilkina, and Le Song. Learning combinatorial opti-
mization algorithms over graphs.Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Mitchell Kiely, Metin Ahiskali, Etienne Borde, Benjamin Bowman, David Bowman, Dirk van
Bruggen, KC Cowan, Prithviraj Dasgupta, Erich Devendorf, Ben Edwards, et al. Exploring the
efficacy of multi-agent reinforcement learning for autonomous cyber defence: A cage challenge
4 perspective. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, pp.
28907–28913, 2025.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
works.arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rockt¨aschel. A survey of zero-shot gener-
alisation in deep reinforcement learning.Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:201–264,
2023.
Guillaume Lachaud, Patricia Conde-Cespedes, and Maria Trocan. Comparison between induc-
tive and transductive learning in a real citation network using graph neural networks. In2022
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining
(ASONAM), pp. 534–540. IEEE, 2022.
Tom M Mitchell. The need for biases in learning generalizations.Rutgers Technical Report, CBM-
TR 5-110, 1980.
12
Paul Erd˝os, Alfr´ed R´enyi, et al. On the evolution of random graphs. Publ. math. inst. hung. acad.
sci, 5(1):17–60, 1960.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Myles Foley, Chris Hicks, Kate Highnam, and Vasilios Mavroudis. Autonomous network defence
using reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pp. 1252–1254, 2022.
Rohit Gangupantulu, Tyler Cody, Abdul Rahma, Christopher Redino, Ryan Clark, and Paul Park.
Crown jewels analysis using reinforcement learning with attack graphs. In 2021 IEEE Symposium
Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2021.
Chungang Gao and Yongjie Wang. Reinforcement learning based self-adaptive moving target de-
fense against ddos attacks. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume 1812, pp. 012039.
IOP Publishing, 2021.
Yazhuo Gao, Guomin Zhang, and Changyou Xing. A multiphase dynamic deployment mechanism
of virtualized honeypots based on intelligent attack path prediction. Security and Communication
Networks, 2021:1–15, 2021.
Stuart Geman, Elie Bienenstock, and Ren´e Doursat. Neural networks and the bias/variance dilemma.
Neural computation, 4(1):1–58, 1992.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jessica B Hamrick, Kelsey R Allen, Victor Bapst, Tina Zhu, Kevin R McKee, Joshua B Tenen-
baum, and Peter W Battaglia. Relational inductive bias for physical construction in humans and
machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01203, 2018.
John Hannay. CardiffUni CAGE2 submission. https://github.com/john-cardiff/
-cyborg-cage-2, 2022.
Jarom´ır Janisch, Tom´aˇs Pevn`y, and Viliam Lis`y. Symbolic relational deep reinforcement learning
based on graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12462, 2020.
Elias Khalil, Hanjun Dai, Yuyu Zhang, Bistra Dilkina, and Le Song. Learning combinatorial opti-
mization algorithms over graphs. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Mitchell Kiely, Metin Ahiskali, Etienne Borde, Benjamin Bowman, David Bowman, Dirk van
Bruggen, KC Cowan, Prithviraj Dasgupta, Erich Devendorf, Ben Edwards, et al. Exploring the
efficacy of multi-agent reinforcement learning for autonomous cyber defence: A cage challenge
4 perspective. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, pp.
28907–28913, 2025.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rockt¨aschel. A survey of zero-shot gener-
alisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:201–264,
2023.
Guillaume Lachaud, Patricia Conde-Cespedes, and Maria Trocan. Comparison between induc-
tive and transductive learning in a real citation network using graph neural networks. In 2022
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining
(ASONAM), pp. 534–540. IEEE, 2022.
Tom M Mitchell. The need for biases in learning generalizations. Rutgers Technical Report, CBM-
TR 5-110, 1980.
12


--- PAGE 13 ---
Aritran Piplai, Mike Anoruo, Kayode Fasaye, Anupam Joshi, Tim Finin, and Ahmad Ridley. Knowl-
edge guided two-player reinforcement learning for cyber attacks and defenses. In2022 21st
IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 1342–1349.
IEEE, 2022.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations.Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URLhttp://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
20-1364.html.
Leonardo FR Ribeiro, Pedro HP Saverese, and Daniel R Figueiredo. struc2vec: Learning node
representations from structural identity. InProceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 385–394, 2017.
Ahmad Ridley. Machine learning for autonomous cyber defense.The Next Wave, 22(1):7–14, 2018.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
The graph neural network model.IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms.arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
TTCP CAGE Working Group. Ttcp cage challenge 4.https://github.com/
cage-challenge/cage-challenge-4, 2023.
Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, Yoshua Ben-
gio, et al. Graph attention networks.stat, 1050(20):10–48550, 2017.
Sanyam Vyas, John Hannay, Andrew Bolton, and Professor Pete Burnap. Automated cyber defence:
A review.arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04926, 2023.
Erich Walter, Kimberly Ferguson-Walter, and Ahmad Ridley. Incorporating deception into cyber-
battlesim for autonomous defense.arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.13980, 2021.
Tingwu Wang, Renjie Liao, Jimmy Ba, and Sanja Fidler. Nervenet: Learning structured policy with
graph neural networks. InInternational conference on learning representations, 2018.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning.Machine learning, 8:279–292, 1992.
Shimon Whiteson, Brian Tanner, Matthew E Taylor, and Peter Stone. Protecting against evaluation
overfitting in empirical reinforcement learning. In2011 IEEE symposium on adaptive dynamic
programming and reinforcement learning (ADPRL), pp. 120–127. IEEE, 2011.
Melody Wolk, Andy Applebaum, Camron Dennler, Patrick Dwyer, Marina Moskowitz, Harold
Nguyen, Nicole Nichols, Nicole Park, Paul Rachwalski, Frank Rau, et al. Beyond cage: In-
vestigating generalization of learned autonomous network defense policies.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.15557, 2022.
David H Wolpert and William G Macready. No free lunch theorems for optimization.IEEE trans-
actions on evolutionary computation, 1(1):67–82, 1997.
Cangshuai Wu, Jiangyong Shi, Yuexiang Yang, and Wenhua Li. Enhancing machine learning based
malware detection model by reinforcement learning. InProceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Communication and Network Security, pp. 74–78, 2018.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
networks? InInternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URLhttps:
//openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km.
Mehdi Yousefi, Nhamo Mtetwa, Yan Zhang, and Huaglory Tianfield. A reinforcement learning ap-
proach for attack graph analysis. In2018 17th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security
And Privacy In Computing And Communications/12th IEEE International Conference On Big
Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE), pp. 212–217. IEEE, 2018.
13
Aritran Piplai, Mike Anoruo, Kayode Fasaye, Anupam Joshi, Tim Finin, and Ahmad Ridley. Knowl-
edge guided two-player reinforcement learning for cyber attacks and defenses. In 2022 21st
IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 1342–1349.
IEEE, 2022.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
20-1364.html.
Leonardo FR Ribeiro, Pedro HP Saverese, and Daniel R Figueiredo. struc2vec: Learning node
representations from structural identity. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 385–394, 2017.
Ahmad Ridley. Machine learning for autonomous cyber defense. The Next Wave, 22(1):7–14, 2018.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
The graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
TTCP CAGE Working Group. Ttcp cage challenge 4. https://github.com/
cage-challenge/cage-challenge-4, 2023.
Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, Yoshua Ben-
gio, et al. Graph attention networks. stat, 1050(20):10–48550, 2017.
Sanyam Vyas, John Hannay, Andrew Bolton, and Professor Pete Burnap. Automated cyber defence:
A review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04926, 2023.
Erich Walter, Kimberly Ferguson-Walter, and Ahmad Ridley. Incorporating deception into cyber-
battlesim for autonomous defense. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.13980, 2021.
Tingwu Wang, Renjie Liao, Jimmy Ba, and Sanja Fidler. Nervenet: Learning structured policy with
graph neural networks. In International conference on learning representations, 2018.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8:279–292, 1992.
Shimon Whiteson, Brian Tanner, Matthew E Taylor, and Peter Stone. Protecting against evaluation
overfitting in empirical reinforcement learning. In 2011 IEEE symposium on adaptive dynamic
programming and reinforcement learning (ADPRL), pp. 120–127. IEEE, 2011.
Melody Wolk, Andy Applebaum, Camron Dennler, Patrick Dwyer, Marina Moskowitz, Harold
Nguyen, Nicole Nichols, Nicole Park, Paul Rachwalski, Frank Rau, et al. Beyond cage: In-
vestigating generalization of learned autonomous network defense policies. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.15557, 2022.
David H Wolpert and William G Macready. No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE trans-
actions on evolutionary computation, 1(1):67–82, 1997.
Cangshuai Wu, Jiangyong Shi, Yuexiang Yang, and Wenhua Li. Enhancing machine learning based
malware detection model by reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Communication and Network Security, pp. 74–78, 2018.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km.
Mehdi Yousefi, Nhamo Mtetwa, Yan Zhang, and Huaglory Tianfield. A reinforcement learning ap-
proach for attack graph analysis. In 2018 17th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security
And Privacy In Computing And Communications/12th IEEE International Conference On Big
Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE), pp. 212–217. IEEE, 2018.
13


--- PAGE 14 ---
A TRAININGCONFIGURATION
To better facilitate replication of our work, in Table 4, we provide the hyperparameters used for each
model. Due to the length of time required to train each model, we did not run ablation every hyper-
parameter, and instead opted for default settings in most cases. In the Yawning Titan environment,
we selected 5M steps as the length of training time for fair comparison with the original paper. We
selected the lower hidden and embedding dimension in Yawning Titan after initial tests with param-
eters identical to the CC2 environment performed poorly. In both environments, we tested both max
and mean pooling and selected the model that performed best.
Table 4: Model Hyperparameters
YT CC2/4
Hidden Dimension 64 256
Embedding Dimension 32 64
Pooling Function Max Mean
Actor LR 3e-4 3e-4
Critic LR 1e-3 1e-3
Episode Length 600 Steps 100 Steps
Episodes per Update (N) 10 100
Training Time 5M Steps 1M Episodes
All agents were trained on a server with an Intel Xeon Gold 6338 CPU using a maximum of 100
cores to simulate N episodes in parallel. Using a GPU would accelerate training slightly, but the
main performance bottleneck was the environment simulators, which were CPU-only.
B ABLATIONSTUDIES
In this section, we present ablation studies on the number of parameters used by the models, and
the choice of GNN. For all ablation experiments, due to the length of time required to train models
for 1M episodes, we constrain training time to 100k episodes. Otherwise, all parameters are fixed,
and the same as they were for the original CC2 experiments other than the hyperparameter being
ablated.
Hidden Dimensions.In these experiments, in addition to changing the hidden dimension, we also
kept the ratio of hidden to embedding dimensions the same (4 to 1), such that the agent with a
32-dimensional hidden dimension has an 8-dimensional embedding, and the agent with 1028 hid-
den dimensions has a 256-dimensional embedding. Otherwise, all other hyperparameters are the
same as before. We observe that as more parameters are added to the models, their average score
does increase somewhat. However, adding additional dimensions comes at a cost: as models grow
larger, the time it takes to perform forward and backward passes has a steep increase. Our choice in
selecting 256 as the hidden dimension was to strike a good balance between score and efficiency.
Figure 9: Average score (smaller is better) as more parameters are added to the model (standard
deviation plotted as the shaded region).
Choice of GNN.To evaluate the model’s sensitivity to the choice of GNN, we evaluate models
trained in the CC2 environment with several different base GNNs, namely SAGE Hamilton et al.
(2017), GAT Velickovic et al. (2017), GIN Xu et al. (2019). All training parameters are the same,
and models are each trained for 100k episodes. We observe that each model performs roughly as
well as the others. GAT has the best average performance overall, but when the standard error is
14
训练配置
为更好地促进我们工作的复现，在表4中，我们提供了每个模型使用的超参数。由于训练每个模型所
需的时间较长，我们没有运行每个超参数的消融实验，而是在大多数情况下选择了默认设置。在
YawningTitan环境中，我们选择了5M步作为训练时间长度，以便与原始论文进行公平比较。在
YawningTitan中，经过初步测试后，我们发现与CC2环境参数相同的模型表现不佳，因此选择了较
低的隐藏层和嵌入维度。在两个环境中，我们都测试了最大池化和平均池化，并选择了表现最好的模
型。
表4：模型超参数
YT CC2/4
隐藏维度 64 256
嵌入维度 32 64
池化函数 Max Mean
Actor学习率 3e-4 3e-4
Critic学习率 1e-3 1e-3
回合长度 600步 100步
每次更新中的剧集数(N) 10 100
训练时间 5M步骤 1M剧集
所有智能体均在配备IntelXeonGold6338CPU的服务器上训练，最多使用100个核心以并行模拟
N个剧集。使用GPU可略微加速训练，但主要性能瓶颈是环境模拟器，这些模拟器仅支持CPU。
BABLATION研究
在本节中，我们展示了模型参数数量和GNN选择上的消融研究。对于所有消融实验，由
于训练1M个回合的模型需要较长时间，我们将训练时间限制为100k个回合。否则，所有
参数均保持固定，与原始CC2实验相同，仅消融的超参数除外。
隐藏维度。在这些实验中，除了改变隐藏维度外，我们还保持隐藏维度与嵌入维度的比例
相同（4:1），即32维隐藏维度的智能体对应8维嵌入维度，1028维隐藏维度的智能体对
应256维嵌入维度。其余所有超参数与之前相同。我们观察到随着模型参数的增加，其平
均分数确实有所提升。然而，增加额外维度是有代价的：随着模型规模增大，前向和后向
传播所需的时间会急剧增加。我们选择256作为隐藏维度的原因是在分数和效率之间取得
了良好的平衡。
图9：随着模型参数增加，平均得分（越低越好）（标准差以阴影区域表示）。
GNN的选择。为了评估模型对GNN选择敏感性的影响，我们在CC2环境中用几种不同的基础GNN训练模型，
具体为SAGEHamilton等人(2017)，GATVelickovic等人(2017)，GINXu等人(2019)。所有训练参数相同，
每个模型均训练100k个回合。我们观察到每个模型的性能大致相当。GAT的平均性能最好，但当考虑标准误差
时，它仅比SAGE有显著性优势({v1})，而其他两个模型则没有({v2})。这些结果支持我们的观点，即该方法与
模型无关；我们的方法对GNN的选择在统计上没有显著敏感性。
14


--- PAGE 15 ---
taken into account, it is only better than SAGE with significance (p= 0.04, whilep >0.1for
the other two models). These results support our claim that the approach is model-agnostic; our
approach is not sensitive to the choice of GNN with statistical significance.
Table 5: Scores of models with different base GNNs on CC2
30 Steps 50 Steps 100 Steps
Total B-Line Meander B-Line Meander B-Line Meander
GCN -80.32±0.99 -5.521 -8.136 -10.718 -12.541 -21.709 -21.698
SAGE -84.23±1.05 -5.458 -9.563 -8.727 -15.069 -19.232 -26.18
GAT -77.59±1.39 -5.164 -9.404 -9.373 -14.282 -16.937 -22.434
GIN -81.44±1.05 -5.809 -8.003 -9.954 -12.802 -22.692 -22.179
C ENVIRONMENTDESCRIPTIONS
The Yawning Titan environmentrepresents nodes with two features each: one representing how
likely an attacker is to be successful at compromising that node, and one representing whether they
have been compromised. Additionally, the full list of edges in the graph representing the network is
also available. We use the combination of node features and edge information as inputs to the GNNs
that power our models. There are also three actions in this environment These actions are all listed
and described in Table 6. In practice, however, we do not implement the Sleep action, as it is always
better to Upgrade a node rather than do nothing.
Table 6: Yawning Titan Actions
Action Description Effect
Restore Removes the attacker from the selected host. Simulates
restoring from a previously saved image.
Update node features to “non-compromised” and reset
the “vulnerability” feature to its initial value
Upgrade Makes the selected host more difficult to compromise in
the future. Simulating a software upgrade or patch.
Decrease the node’s “vulnerability” feature by 0.2.
Sleep Do nothing
The reward function is the ratio of compromised to non-compromised hosts at each time step, with
a 100-point bonus for reaching 500 timesteps without allowing every host to be compromised. If
every host is compromised before step 500, the agent receives a penalty of -100 points.
The CC2 environmentprovides highly detailed observations with a great deal of information about
each host in the network. We only considered the Host, Connection (meaning open ports), File,
and Subnet entities when constructing our graphs from the available data. Table 7 contains a full
description of the features considered for each node type. Entries with an asterisk denote engi-
neered features. Entries without an asterisk are directly provided in the observations emitted by the
environment.
The environment allows for ten total action types, each described in greater detail in Table 8. Unlike
the Yawning Titan environment, in CC2, actions may have a cost associated with them. In this
environment, only the Restore action, which fully wipes a host and restores it from an image, has
a cost of -1. The Analyze action provides more information about the files on a given host. The
Remove action kills any user-level shells on the host. Finally there are seven different Decoy actions,
each starting a honeypot process on a different port. Certain decoys are only allowed on specific
operating systems, and decoys can only be created if the host is not running any other processes on
the port they would occupy.
The reward function for this environment is the number of compromised hosts in the network. For
each user-type host compromised, a penalty of 0.1 points is applied; compromised server-type hosts
are penalized 1.0 points; if the critical assetOpServer0is compromised, there is a penalty of 10
points. The full reward function is the sum of penalties from host compromises and the cost of the
action selected by the agent.
The CC4 Environmentis similar to the CC2 environment. Observations are identical between the
environments with two differences. In CC4, as timesteps progress, the environment goes through
15
这些结果支持我们的主张，即该方法与模型无关；我们的方法对GNN的选择在统计上没
有显著敏感性。
表5：不同基础GNN模型在CC2上的得分
30步 50步 100步
总计
B‑Line
蜿蜒 B线 蜿蜒 B线 蜿蜒
GCN ‑80.32 ± 0.99 -5.521 -8.136 -10.718 -12.541 -21.709 -21.698
SAGE ‑84.23 ± 1.05 -5.458 -9.563 -8.727 -15.069 -19.232 -26.18
GAT ‑77.59 ± 1.39 -5.164 -9.404 -9.373 -14.282 -16.937 -22.434
GIN ‑81.44 ± 1.05 -5.809 -8.003 -9.954 -12.802 -22.692 -22.179
C环境描述
YawningTitan环境表示每个节点具有两个特征：一个表示攻击者成功入侵该节点的可能
性，另一个表示该节点是否已被入侵。此外，还提供了表示网络的图中所有边的完整列表。
我们使用节点特征和边信息的组合作为驱动我们模型的GNN的输入。在这个环境中还有
三个动作。这些动作全部列于表6中并进行了描述。然而，在实践中，我们不实现Sleep
动作，因为升级节点总比什么都不做强。
表6：YawningTitan动作
动作 描述 效果
恢复 将攻击者从选定的主机中移除。模拟
从先前保存的镜像中恢复。
将节点特征更新为“未受损”，并将“漏洞”特征重置为其
初始值
升级 使选定的主机在未来更难被攻破
模拟软件升级或补丁
将节点的“漏洞”特征减少0.2
休眠 什么也不做
奖励函数是每个时间步长下受损主机与非受损主机的比率，若在500个时间步长内未让所有主机
都受损，则获得100分奖励。如果所有主机在500步之前都受损，代理将受到‑100分的惩罚。
CC2环境提供了高度详细的观察数据，包含网络中每个主机的丰富信息。在从可用数据构
建图时，我们仅考虑了主机、连接（指开放端口）、文件和子网实体。表7包含了对每种节
点类型所考虑特征的完整描述。带星号的项目表示人工设计的特征。不带星号的项目是环
境发出的观察数据中直接提供的。
该环境允许十种总动作类型，每种动作的详细描述见表8。与YawningTitan环境不同，在
CC2中，动作可能具有成本。在此环境中，只有恢复动作（将主机完全擦除并从镜像中恢
复）的成本为‑1。分析动作提供更多关于给定主机上文件的信息。移除动作会杀死主机上
的任何用户级shell。最后，有七种不同的诱饵动作，每种动作在不同的端口上启动蜜罐进
程。某些诱饵仅允许在特定的操作系统上使用，且诱饵只能在主机不运行任何其他进程的
端口上创建时才能创建。
该环境的奖励函数是网络中受感染的主机数量。对于每个受感染的用户类型主机，将扣除
0.1分；受感染的服务器类型主机将被扣除1.0分；如果关键资产OpServer0受感染，将扣
除10分。完整的奖励函数是主机受感染扣除的分数以及代理选择的行动成本的总和。
CC4环境与CC2环境相似。这两个环境中的观察结果完全相同，但有兩点区别。在CC4中，随着时
间步的推进，环境会经历
15


--- PAGE 16 ---
Table 7: Node features in the CAGE Environments
Node Type Feature Feature type Additional information
Host
Architecture One-hot
OS Distribution One-hot
OS Type One-hot
OS Version One-hot
OS Kernel Version One-hot
OS Patches One-hot
Is Critical* Boolean Applied toOp Server0node in CAGE-2. Means that this node has extra penal-
ties for being compromised
Is User* Boolean
Is Server* Boolean
Files
File Type One-hot
File Path One-hot
Version One-hot
Type One-hot
Vendor One-hot
Density Float
Signed Boolean
User Permissions int[0-7]
Group Permissions int[0-7]
Default Permissions int[0-7]
Connection Is Decoy* Boolean If the connection is to a decoy process running on the host
Subnet None Structural node to connect hosts residing in the same subnet
* Engineered features that are not provided by default
Table 8: Blue agent action space in the CAGE environments
Action Description Effect Cost
Monitor Review network traffic logs for suspicious activity. This
action is taken implicitly every turn, but if selected ex-
plicitly, it functions as a no-op action.
Create edges from host nodes to connection nodes if net-
work activity is observed.
0
Analyze Attempt to learn it if this host has been compromised by
the red agent.
Update node features if it is compromised. Add file
nodes and edges connecting them to host if found during
scan.
0
Remove Attempt to remove the red agent from this machine.
However, if the red agent has privilege escalated to root,
this action will fail.
Update node features if successful. 0
Restore Guarantees the red agent will be removed from this host,
but causes significant disruption to the network
Remove all edges to open port nodes adjacent to the
host. Reset the host node’s features to show it as not
compromised.
1
Decoy Open a port on this host to act as a honeypot for the red
agent. If the red agent attempts to compromise that port,
it will fail. There are 7 types of decoy actions. Each may
only be used if the port it would open is not in use, and
sometimes only if the host uses a specific OS.
Create a new open port node with an edge to connecting
it to the host.
0
AllowTraffic** Modifies a firewall rule to allow communication be-
tween two subnets
Creates an edge between the two subnet nodes 0
BlockTraffic** Modifies a firewall rule to disallow communication be-
tween two subnets
Deletes an edge between the two subnet nodes 0
** Actions only available in the CC4 environment.
three distinct phases. During each phase, there are different firewall rules and communication poli-
cies that are allowed. We communicate the current phase to the agent as input to the global vector
network. The second difference is that agents are each allowed to communicate 8 bits to one another.
We used this to indicate the state of each subnet the agent was defending. For each subnet, the first
bit represented if any host in the subnet had been compromised. We used the second bit as a check
bit to determine the difference between no message (0,0) and a message of no compromise (0,1).
These messages were used as features for the subnet nodes they corresponded to. Another impor-
tant distinction is that agents do not have full knowledge of the network. Each agent only receives
observations about the subnets it defends; their only knowledge of subnets outside of their influence
is through the messages sent by other agents.
Last, the reward structure in CC4 is different from CC2. Rewards are based on the ability of green
agents (representing employees) to do either local work, or access services throughout the network.
16
表7：CAGE环境中的节点特征
节点类型 特征 特征类型 附加信息
Host
架构
One‑hot
操作系统发行版 One‑hot
操作系统类型 One‑hot
操作系统版本 One‑hot
操作系统内核版本 One‑hot
操作系统补丁 One‑hot
是否关键* 布尔值 应用于CAGE‑2中的OpServer0节点。表示该节点在遭受攻击时会有额外的惩罚
是否为用户*
布尔值是否为服务器
* 布尔值
文件
文件类型 独热编码
文件路径 独热编码
版本
One‑hot
Type One‑hot
供应商
One‑hot
密度 浮点数
已签署 布尔值
用户权限 int[0‑7]
组权限 int[0‑7]
默认权限 int[0‑7]
连接 是否诱饵* 布尔值 如果连接到主机上运行的诱饵进程
子网 None 用于连接同一子网中的主机的结构节点
*默认情况下未提供的工程化特征
表8：CAGE环境中蓝代理的动作空间
动作 描述 效果 Cost
显示器 检查网络流量日志中的可疑活动。此操作每回合都会隐式
执行，但如果明确选择，则作为无操作（no‑op）执行。
如果观察到网络活动，则从主机节点到连接节点创建边。
如果观察到网络活动。
0
分析 如果该主机已被红方代理入侵，尝试学习它。 如果节点已受损，请更新节点功能。 添加文件
如果在过程中发现节点和连接它们的边，请将它们连接到主机。
scan.
0
移除 尝试从这台机器中移除红色代理。但是，如果红色
代理的权限已提升至root，此操作将失败。
如果成功，请更新节点功能。 0
恢复 保证红色代理将从该主机中移除，但会对网络造成重大
干扰
移除所有与主机相邻的开端口节点。重置主机节点
的特征，以显示其未受感染。
1
诱饵 在该主机上打开一个端口，作为红色代理的蜜罐。如果红
色代理尝试感染该端口，它将失败。有7种诱饵操作类型。
每种操作只有在它将要打开的端口未被使用时才能使用，
有时还只有在主机使用特定操作系统时才能使用。
创建一个新的开端口节点，并创建一条边将其连接到主机。 0
允许流量** 修改防火墙规则以允许两个子网之间的通信
之间的通信
在两个子网节点之间创建一条边 0
阻止流量**修改防火墙规则以禁止两个子网之间的通信 删除两个子网节点之间的边 0
**仅在CC4环境中可用。
三个不同的阶段。在每个阶段中，存在不同的防火墙规则和允许的通信策略。我们将当前
阶段作为输入传递给代理，作为全局向量网络的输入。第二个区别是，每个代理都允许向
彼此发送8位信息。我们使用它来表示代理所防御的每个子网的状态。对于每个子网，第
一位表示子网中的任何主机是否已被攻破。我们使用第二位作为校验位，以区分无消息
（0,0）和表示无攻破消息（0,1）。这些消息被用作它们对应的子网节点的特征。另一个
重要区别是，代理对网络没有完全的了解。每个代理仅接收关于其防御的子网的观察结果；
它们对自身影响范围之外的子网的了解仅通过其他代理发送的消息。
最后，CC4中的奖励机制与CC2不同。奖励基于绿色代理（代表员工）执行本地工作或访问整个网络
服务的能力。
16


--- PAGE 17 ---
The red agent attempts to disrupt hosts, and if it is successful, when a green action tries to use it,
it will fail, and the blue agent will be penalized. The exact penalty amount changes based on the
current phase and the subnet of the host the green agent couldn’t access.
17
红色代理试图破坏主机，如果成功，当绿色动作尝试使用它时，将失败，蓝色代理将被处
罚。具体的处罚金额会根据当前阶段以及绿色代理无法访问的主机子网而变化。
17
