
--- PAGE 1 ---
IEEE Intelligent SystemsPublished by the IEEE Computer SocietyJuly/August 2025
29
The ability of large language models (LLMs) to interpret and generate human-like 
text, along with their inbuilt knowledge and reasoning skills, has opened the door 
for many new applications. We develop a novel LLM agent as an autonomous cyber 
defender and benchmark it using the CAGE-2 public challenge, which evaluates 
submitted agents in a simulated network. The agent uses a pretrained LLM to 
interpret a text description of the challenge and choose the best defensive action 
given a network observation. Its performance is on par with the most successful 
reinforcement learning agent submitted to CAGE-2 with the advantages of 
explainability and avoiding training episodes, but with the cost of requiring LLM 
prompt engineering. Finally, we test the LLM agent experimentally to explore how 
LLM temperature and prompt complexity affect performance. We show that higher 
complexity prompts significantly improve performance, while LLM temperature has 
only a minor effect.
G
overnment services online are exposed to cy-
ber threats, including service disruption and 
information leakage.1,2 Defenses to these cyber 
threats are human-centric which, given the highly com-
plex and interconnected digital infrastructure, results 
in slow response times and the risk of human error.
Autonomous cyber defense systems, driven by AI, 
offer a potential solution of near real-time threat de-
tection and response with minimal human oversight. 
However, developing such systems poses difficulties, 
including ensuring accuracy and adapting to novel 
threats. The core goal is to create an autonomous cy-
ber defense that scales and adapts in real-world envi-
ronments with high reliability and trustworthiness.
Our approach for developing an autonomous cyber 
defense agent uses a pretrained large language model 
(LLM) as a decision maker, leveraging the LLM’s inbuilt 
knowledge and instruction-following abilities. We in-
vestigate whether the LLM can decide on a suitable 
sequence of actions to defend a simulated network 
from attack.
LLMs have already been applied to cybersecurity, 
including the study of an LLM agent to perform offen-
sive operations in a simulation. 3 However, there is a 
lack of research testing the suitability of LLM agents 
for defensive operations where the agent needs to 
balance the requirements of both stopping the red at-
tacker and maintaining network functionality.
We test an LLM agent in the Cyber Autonomy Gym 
for Experimentation-2 (CAGE-2)4 public challenge. The 
challenge simulates a small enterprise network within 
the Cyber Operations Research Gym (CybORG 5) and 
also provides automated red agent attackers for test -
ing submissions of autonomous defenders. The simu-
lation is a safe environment for testing and maturing 
autonomous agents and establishing any human–ma -
chine interactions. While CAGE-2 was designed for ex-
perimentation with reinforcement learning (RL)-based 
agents for cyber defense, CAGE-2 is also amenable 
THEME ARTICLE: INTELLIGENT AND AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS  
IN GOVERNMENT
Leveraging Large Language Models for 
Autonomous Cyber Defense: Insights from 
CAGE-2 Simulations
Hamoun Mohammadi , Defence and Security Institute, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 5005, Australia
Jonathan J. Davis  and Mitchell Kiely , Defence Science and Technology Group, Edinburgh, SA, 5111, Australia 
1541-1672 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for 
text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and 
similar technologies.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MIS.2025.3568209
Date of publication 8 May 2025; date of current version  
11 August 2025.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on September 17,2026 at 15:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
INTELLIGENT AND AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS IN GOVERNMENT
30
IEEE Intelligent Systems July/August 2025
to experimentation with other agent types, includ-
ing LLM-based agents. This allows us to compare the 
performance of our LLM agent to previous RL submis-
sions in CAGE-2.
The main contributions of the article are:
 ❯ The development of an LLM agent for autono-
mous cyber defense in a simulated enterprise 
network environment. The agent’s performance 
is compared to RL agents, and its advantages and 
limitations for network defense are discussed.
 ❯ Experiments that test the effectiveness of 
prompt complexity and LLM temperature on 
LLM agent performance.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. The 
“Background” section discusses related work and in-
formation about the CAGE-2 public challenge. The 
“LLM Agent Architecture” section describes how our 
agent was developed, and then the “Agent Evaluation” 
section describes the experiments to measure its 
performance. The “Results” section details the exper -
iment outcomes, which are then described in the “Dis-
cussion” section. The article’s “ Conclusion” section 
outlines limitations and future work.
BACKGROUND
Related Works
LLMs can perform multiple tasks, including human-like 
text generation, text summarization, conversational 
question/answering, and computer code generation. 6 
LLMs have also shown promise in their ability to rea -
son, plan, and self-reflect.7 These qualities have led to 
a surge in research to determine the effectiveness of 
LLMs within autonomous agents, including applica -
tions for robotics8 and AI task solvers.9
In the field of cybersecurity, LLM source code gen-
eration and interpretation skills have recently been 
used to build innovative applications. These include a 
penetration testing tool to generate one-day exploits 
from text descriptions of vulnerabilities,10 and a source 
code patching tool to scan for vulnerabilities and auto-
matically apply patches.11
Our approach is closely related to the LLM agent 
developed by Rigaki et al. for offensive cyber oper -
ations in simulation. 3 Their agent runs in both their 
NetSecGame and CyberBattleSim 12 simulations with 
the task of choosing actions as a cyber attacker. It uses 
the GPT-4 LLM to choose the next action after provid-
ing the LLM a specially crafted prompt consisting of 
game instructions, memory, examples, and the current 
status. Similarly, we develop an LLM agent to choose 
actions within a simulation environment. However, 
our approach differs first, because we take the side of 
blue, and second, because we experimentally analyze 
the effect of LLM temperature and prompt complexity 
on agent performance.
To enable the development of autonomous cyber 
agents, cyber simulation environments, such as Cy-
bORG and CyberBattleSim, provide feedback to agents 
in the form of a reward. The rewards enable the train-
ing of RL agents via an OpenAI gym interface. 13 Our 
autonomous LLM agent does not require training on 
episodic data per RL agents. However, reward signals 
serve as scoring mechanisms for comparison between 
LLM and RL agents.
When LLMs, such as GPT-3 14 and Llama, 15 were 
 released, they demonstrated to the public significant 
advances in interpreting and generating human-like 
language and answering general knowledge ques-
tions. The models were trained on extensive language 
datasets curated from human contributions on the 
web, including publicly available cybersecurity infor -
mation. We rely on the LLM to have some inbuilt cyber-
security knowledge so it can interpret the information 
provided to the LLM in each prompt about the current 
state of the network.
Despite the advances made with LLMs, they may still 
provide false or unhelpful answers to user queries. To over-
come such issues, prompt engineering aims to guide LLM 
behavior to make responses more relevant, accurate, and 
consistent. Prompt engineering does not require modifi-
cation to the LLM weights, but simply asks questions in 
a particular way and provides relevant context, e.g., the 
chain-of-thought prompt “Let’s think step by step” sig-
nificantly increases performance on math benchmarks, 
such as GSM8K.7 Our agent uses ReAct-style prompting 
in a two-step “reason” and “act” process, along with few-
shot learning to improve LLM responses.
CAGE-2
To evaluate an LLM agent in a dynamic environment, 
we used CAGE-2 4 as it is considered 16 a standard 
benchmark to compare methods for autonomous cy-
ber defense. The CAGE-2 challenge requires users to 
create an autonomous blue agent tasked with the de-
fense of a compact enterprise network simulated us-
ing CybORG,5 as shown in Figure 1.
The challenge begins with the network in a pos-
tinitial exploit state in which the red agent has root 
access on a user host within Subnet 1. In one run of a 
game, known as a trial, a blue agent must defend the 
network against the red agent for a variable number of 
time steps.
The goal of the red agent is to move laterally 
within the enterprise network and gain access to 
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on September 17,2026 at 15:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
INTELLIGENT AND AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS IN GOVERNMENT
IEEE Intelligent SystemsJuly/August 2025
31
the operational server. Three rules-based red agents 
are provided: b-line, meander, and sleep. This article 
focuses on defending the network against the b-line 
agent. The b-line agent executes actions in the least 
number of steps to reach and disrupt the operational 
server, thanks to prior network knowledge. The mean-
der agent instead operates without any prior network 
knowledge, incrementally gaining privileged access to 
all hosts in a subnet before moving to the next sub-
net. The sleep agent serves as the benchmark and 
takes no offensive measures, allowing us to discern 
the blue agent’s ability to recognize a nonthreatening 
situation. The blue agent’s goal is to minimize the red 
agent’s presence while sustaining network service 
availability.
The blue agent’s action space is a set of 145 dis-
crete actions. During each time step only one action 
can be selected by the blue agent. Apart from the 
sleep action, blue actions can be segregated into 
three distinct classes: reconnaissance, deception, 
and restoration. Reconnaissance actions enhance the 
blue agent’s understanding of the current state of the 
network. Deception actions aim to slow down the red 
agent’s movement by inserting decoys into the spec-
ified host. Finally, the restoration actions revert the 
host or server to a red agent-free state. Determining 
which action is the most effective to take at any given 
time step is entirely up to the autonomous agent.
LLM AGENT ARCHITECTURE
The LLM agent was designed to defend a network 
within the CybORG environment by preventing a red 
agent from reaching its target, the operational server. 
It consists of an LLM along with a small library of help-
er classes, methods, and prompts. The blue agent’s li-
brary was designed to query the LLM in two separate 
tasks, each using a different prompt. The first task was 
to detect the current state of red agent threats, and 
the second task was to decide the best blue agent 
course of action. This multistep approach is similar to 
the “ReAct” prompting method.17 The first prompt to 
the LLM returns potential threats in the environment, 
which are then included in the second prompt as con-
text to help the LLM decide the next cyber defense 
action.
The architecture of the blue agent is shown in 
 Figure 2, with the purpose and operation of each mod-
ule described in the following sections.
LLM Agent
At the start of a trial, CybORG provides the blue agent 
with an initial observation that details the network to-
pology, including endpoint information, such as active 
processes, their privilege level, and open ports. The ob-
servation is sent to the agent’s parser for processing.
Parser and Formatter
This module converts a CybORG observation into text 
format to enable interpretation using the LLM’s innate 
FIGURE 1. Enterprise network for CAGE-2 challenge.
FIGURE 2. LLM agent architecture, with green boxes repre-
senting the calls made to the LLM.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on September 17,2026 at 15:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
INTELLIGENT AND AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS IN GOVERNMENT
32
IEEE Intelligent Systems July/August 2025
text-processing capabilities. The parser first extracts 
useful information from the current observation’s data 
structure. Then it retrieves from agent memory the 
previous observation and agent action. The formatter 
integrates this information into a standardized string 
and provides it to the next module.
Detect LLM Prompt
The purpose of the blue agent’s first LLM query is to 
detect what occurred in the most recent CybORG 
step, in particular red agent activity. To enable detec-
tion, we provide necessary information to the LLM in 
the form of a prompt which consists of three parts, 
as per the example in Appendix A of the supplemen-
tary information (available at https://doi.org/10.1109/
MIS.2025.3568209, provided by the authors).
First, there is a worded explanation of the problem 
and the task to perform. Only enough information re-
garding the CybORG environment is provided for the 
LLM to do its intended tasks, resulting in the “game 
rules prompt.” Second, there is a comprehensive stat-
ic “examples prompt,” utilizing few-shot and chain-of-
thought strategies, with example CybORG observa -
tions presented in the format produced by the parser 
module. The examples demonstrate how to solve the 
problem step by step, with explicit statements re-
garding the decision logic so the LLM will base its 
own thinking on the examples. Third, the “observation 
prompt” lists the current and previous blue observa -
tions. These observations include hosts running in the 
network and their processes and connections.
We combine all three parts into a single prompt 
and send it to the LLM. The LLM uses this information 
to infer what action was performed in the CybORG 
environment during the last time step. Since only the 
red and blue agents perform actions, this enables the 
detection of current red agent threats. The LLM then 
returns the action as a JSON object showing the name 
of the host and the action performed, e.g. {“active”: 
“Yes”, “Enterprise0”: “exploit”}.
Analyzer
The analyzer module receives the LLM answer stating 
the most recent action and updates the agent’s in-
ternal state vector of network endpoints accordingly. 
The state vector specifies the current security status 
for each host as safe , exploit, escalate, or decoy. Safe 
means no detected red agent activity for the host, ex-
ploit means the red agent has gained user-level access 
to the host via an exploit, while escalate means the red 
agent has gained admin or root access. Decoy means 
the blue agent has added a decoy service to the host 
with no detected red agent activity. When an endpoint 
is detected as exploited, the analyzer module checks 
the startup privilege level of the exploited process. If it 
is a root process, then the system is fully compromised 
and the state vector for that host is updated from ex -
ploit to escalate.
Decide LLM Prompt
The updated state vector of network endpoints plus 
the inferred last red agent action is then written into 
a new prompt for a second LLM query. An example 
of this “decide prompt” is shown in Appendix B of 
the supplementary information (available at https://
doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2025.3568209, provided by the 
 authors). The query asks the LLM to decide which blue 
agent action to perform given the information in the 
rest of the prompt.
Action Selection
The LLM’s answer consists of the chosen action to be 
performed by the blue agent. The action is in string for-
mat, so this module converts it to a CybORG action to 
perform in the next time step. After both red and blue 
actions are taken, the agent reads the next CybORG 
observation and the process repeats.
AGENT EVALUATION
We evaluated the LLM agent in online and offline sce-
narios. In the online assessment, the blue LLM agent 
performed defensive actions in the CAGE-2 environ-
ment to prevent the b-line red agent from furthering 
its foothold in the network. The b-line agent was se-
lected because it represented the worst-case sce-
nario, where an attacker possesses knowledge of the 
target network, enabling rapid navigation through the 
subnets to inflict maximum damage in the fewest pos-
sible actions. Therefore, this evaluation measured the 
LLM agent’s ability to execute a series of actions that 
minimized this damage. On the other hand, the offline 
evaluation, which utilized extracted simulation data, 
was conducted to test the LLM’s ability to select the 
optimal action based on a given observation. This eval-
uation was performed across a range of LLM tempera-
tures and varying levels of prompt complexities. For 
all experiments, OpenAI’s GPT-4 was prompted as the 
LLM, since it produced more accurate and consistent 
outputs compared to GPT-3.5, Falcon-7B, and smaller 
locally hosted models.
Online Evaluation
Measuring the effectiveness of the LLM agent was 
evaluated with a reward-based method. The reward 
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on September 17,2026 at 15:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
INTELLIGENT AND AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS IN GOVERNMENT
IEEE Intelligent SystemsJuly/August 2025
33
system closely aligns with the blue agent’s goals by: 
1) penalizing the blue agent whenever the red agent 
has root access to a host/server, 2) penalizing the blue 
agent for executing the costly restorative actions, and 
3) penalizing the blue agent each time the red agent 
disrupts the operational server. This is represented in 
the following equation:
.
.
Reward host server
Blue Red
01 1
10
Blue RedR ed
Restorei mpact
=- --
--
^
^
h
h
hostRed and serverRed represent the number of servers 
and hosts, respectively, that the red agent has root 
access to. The −1 after host Red accounts for the ini-
tial foothold which the red agent commences with, 
which cannot be removed. Blue Restore and Red impact are 
binary variables that equate to 1 if the representation 
actions were taken in a given time step or 0 other -
wise. Accordingly, the maximum reward an agent can 
obtain is zero. The blue LLM agent was evaluated 
against the red b-line agent across 30 trials, where 
each trial consisted of 30 time steps. The number 
of trials was limited to 30 due to the LLMs slow in-
ference rate, resulting in slow action selection com-
pared to RL agents. The number of time steps per tri-
al was also chosen as 30 due to b-line’s deterministic 
behavior, which follows a 15-step kill-chain. Thus, in-
creasing the number of time steps per trial is unlikely 
to offer any new insights.
We took the reward score from each trial to calcu-
late the average reward and the standard deviation, 
from which we derived a 95% confidence interval. 
We then compared the calculated reward confidence 
interval for the LLM agent, with the results from the 
victor of the CAGE-2 challenge, an RL-based agent 
trained in the same scenario.
Offline Evaluation
We conducted an offline evaluation of the LLM by 
running tests using observations from the online eval-
uation. We selected 50 unique observations from the 
logs of the online evaluation to test the LLM’s reason-
ing abilities to select the optimal action for a given 
observation.
We evaluated the LLM’s performance using three 
different classes of prompts with increasing detail 
and complexity at four distinct model temperatures. 
Subject matter experts determined what the optimal 
action was for each of the 50 observations. We then 
passed the prompt and the observation to the LLM, 
recorded the action that was generated, and com-
pared this output to our determined optimal action. 
We conducted this test for all 50 observations, across 
all prompt complexities and model temperatures. We 
scored as a failure any response that did not exactly 
match the desired output as that response would have 
led to a nonoptimal action within a CybORG game.
To best describe and quantify prompt complexi-
ty, we created three categories: low-, medium-, and 
high-complexity prompts. Each represented the vary-
ing level of detail provided in the prompt regarding the 
simulation and task to perform.
Low-complexity prompting is shown as the com-
bination of the “game rules prompt (low complexi-
ty)” and “observations prompt” in Appendix A of the 
supplementary information (available at https://
doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2025.3568209, provided by the 
 authors). We defined a low-complexity prompt as one 
written with minimal information, containing vague 
and incomplete explanations, and with no example 
cases. We wrote the explanation in an intentionally 
vague manner, as would a novice who might expect 
the LLM to understand the nuances of the task by 
itself.
For the medium-complexity prompt, we included a 
much more detailed initial explanation of the task and 
rules, as well as a noncomprehensive example set of 
six examples, containing only the most frequently ap-
pearing inputs. We wrote the examples followed by the 
correct response to them and omitted the intermedi-
ate steps and reasoning, only telling the model to work 
step by step to reach the correct answer, a technique 
known as chain-of-thought. Although we provided the 
LLM with much more context, the limited scope of 
these examples and the lack of scrutiny in their expla-
nations made this class of prompting significantly less 
detailed than the following style.
High-complexity prompts have the same detailed 
explanation as the medium-complexity prompt, paired 
with an extended example set, intended to be much 
more comprehensive and encapsulate the many dif -
fering potential observations. As shown in Appendix A 
of the supplementary information (available at https://
doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2025.3568209, provided by the 
authors), we provided the LLM with highly detailed ex-
ample explanations that contained step-by-step rea -
soning. Our high-complexity prompt was developed 
in the final iteration of the LLM agent and is the most 
specialized for the task. This prompt utilized chain-of-
thought and few-shot learning prompting strategies.
LLM temperature controls the randomness of the 
LLM output. A temperature closer to zero results in 
more deterministic output, in that the highest proba -
bility next token is always selected. As the temperature 
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on September 17,2026 at 15:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
INTELLIGENT AND AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS IN GOVERNMENT
34
IEEE Intelligent Systems July/August 2025
increases, more weight is given to other possible to-
kens, leading to more diverse outputs.
We tested the LLM across all 50 examples in 12 
different experiment configurations. Each experiment 
used a combination of prompt complexity (low, medi-
um, or high) and LLM temperature (0.25, 0.6, 0.9, or 1.1) 
to observe the effects of these factors on the correct-
ness of the LLM responses.
RESULTS
In the online evaluation, we collected rewards from tri-
als played with the LLM agent to measure the agent’s 
performance. T able 1 shows the 95% confidence in-
terval for the reward for the LLM agent alongside that 
of the top-performing RL agent. Since the confidence 
intervals overlap, there is no statistical difference in 
their performance. The interval between lower and up-
per bound is 0.66 for the LLM agent and 0.21 for the RL 
agent. The smaller interval for the RL agent is due to 
performing many more trials for that agent.
In the offline evaluation, we assessed the accuracy 
of the LLM’s action selection across various prompt 
complexities and LLM temperatures. The results in 
Figure 3 show that LLM accuracy in producing an ex -
act output is very sensitive to prompt complexity. The 
high-complexity prompt produces the highest accura-
cy. However, varying the LLM temperature results in 
only minor changes to LLM accuracy.
DISCUSSION
The online evaluation demonstrated that LLM agents 
can achieve results comparable to RL agents in auton-
omous cyber defense. This is shown in T able 1, where 
only a 0.04 difference in the average reward exists be-
tween the two agents. The significant overlap in their 
95% confidence intervals suggests that the LLM agent 
matched the performance of the most capable RL 
agent against the b-line red agent.
The comparison between the LLM and RL agents 
is fair as both implemented their algorithms specifical-
ly to counter the b-line red agent, and they were both 
developed within the same allocated timeframe. From 
the RL perspective, the blue agent was specifically 
trained against only the b-line red agent. On the other 
hand, from the LLM perspective, the LLM prompt was 
designed with the b-line’s strategy in mind, including 
telling the LLM to prioritize defense of critical hosts 
that we expect the b-line agent will target.
We found the LLM agent did not generalize par -
ticularly well to a different attacker. We conducted a 
simple test with an unchanged blue LLM agent de-
fending against the meander red agent for an equal 
number of time steps. The rewards obtained were not 
as competitive as the top-performing RL agent, which 
was trained specifically against the meander agent. 
This outcome is attributed to the current LLM prompt 
being designed solely to counter the b-line red agent. 
Additionally, since the meander agent explores the 
network in a different manner, many environment ob-
servations are out-of-distribution states compared to 
the example observations listed in our LLM prompt.
One advantage of using LLM agents over RL agents 
is their explainability. While the LLM model itself is a 
black box, it can provide a step-by-step explanation 
of how it generated an answer in response to a query. 
This allows a user to comprehend why the LLM select-
ed the action it executed, whereas RL models provide 
no such insights.
Another advantage is the flexibility of prompt en-
gineering. LLM agents offer a high potential for mod-
ular expansions to prompts, allowing changes to pro-
cessing logic and swift and streamlined redeployment. 
This is in contrast to the time and computing power 
required to train RL models, especially for emulation of 
real-world environments.
A disadvantage of using LLM agents is their slower 
inference time when selecting actions. Additionally, 
the model complexity, in terms of number of model 
TABLE 1. Comparison o f top RL agent and LLM agent re-
ward performance with 95% confidence intervals against the 
b-line agent for 30 time steps.
Agent Type RL Agent LLM Agent
Mean reward −3.47 −3.51
Lower bound −3.58 −3.84
Upper bound −3.37 −3.18
Number of trials 1000 30
FIGURE 3.  Visual repr esentation of accuracy against LLM 
temperature and prompt complexity.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on September 17,2026 at 15:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
INTELLIGENT AND AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS IN GOVERNMENT
IEEE Intelligent SystemsJuly/August 2025
35
parameters, is significantly higher for pretrained LLMs 
compared to RL models. Finally, the prompt engineer 
requires a comprehensive understanding of the task 
to effectively instruct the LLMs.
The offline evaluation measures the effect of 
prompt complexity and LLM temperature on the LLM’s 
ability to select the optimal action for a given obser -
vation. The offline dataset consists of 50 observations 
generated from b-line agent runs, with each obser -
vation being a different state configuration. As such, 
these observations represent a diverse set for LLM 
agent evaluation. The offline evaluation used the same 
50 observations when testing different LLM tempera -
ture and prompt complexity pairings.
We found that prompt complexity was the 
most critical factor in selecting the optimal action. 
High-complexity prompts consistently outper -
formed both medium- and low-complexity prompts 
across all temperature ranges. Higher-complexity 
prompts were more detailed and included more ex -
amples. Fewer examples force the LLM to general-
ize its knowledge to out-of-distributions states, i.e., 
observations they have not seen before. The results 
suggest that LLM agents struggle to generalize from 
limited information.
For the low-complexity prompt, changes in the 
model temperature did not significantly affect the 
model’s performance. However, modifying the LLM’s 
temperature did impact the performance in the medi-
um- and high-complexity prompts. The medium-com-
plexity prompt performed best at a temperature of 0.9, 
which resulted in an accuracy increase of 14%. The 
high-complexity prompt performed best at a tempera-
ture of 0.6, with only a 4% variation between its high-
est and lowest performing temperatures. We surmise 
the very specific instructions in the high-complexity 
prompt are suited to a lower LLM temperature for pre-
dictable responses.
We used GPT-4 as the LLM in our agent architecture 
as it consistently performed better than other models, 
such as GPT-3.5 and smaller locally hosted models. The 
drawback of this powerful model is higher prompting 
token costs and longer response times associated with 
each prompt. In the offline and online evaluation, where 
time associated with decision making does not impact 
performance, powerful models are more advantageous. 
In a more realistic setting, where the time required to 
execute actions impacts the results, a more rigorous 
model selection process will be required.
When selecting different temperatures, we tested 
up to a value of 1.1, as higher temperatures led to in-
accurate LLM responses with excessive hallucination. 
Temperatures lower than 0.25 also produced signifi-
cantly inferior results as they interpreted the examples 
too literally and failed to recognize patterns and adapt 
to differing circumstances.
CONCLUSION
We demonstrated the use of prompt engineering to 
successfully guide a pretrained LLM in the role of an 
autonomous blue agent in a cyber simulation chal-
lenge. The performance of the LLM agent matched 
that of RL agents for the task. Experiments also 
showed the benefit of writing detailed prompts. 
However, there are currently several limitations to 
our approach.
Real-World Applicability
Our experiments were performed in simulation. 
Whether LLM agents can succeed in real-world, un-
constrained environments is unknown. Additionally, 
our experiments were performed against a single red 
agent. To defend a network against a range of attack-
ers, the LLM agent prompts would need to be extend-
ed. While prompt engineering is easily extensible, it is 
unclear how well this approach would scale to counter 
numerous different attack vectors.
Computing Resources
LLMs require significant computing resources at infer-
ence time. They are more costly to run than smaller, 
single-task AI models, such as an RL model. Therefore, 
LLM agents must offer more than matching the perfor-
mance of an RL model to justify the additional expense 
and hardware demands. Future work could quantify 
additional benefits, such as explainability or prompt 
flexibility, to justify the LLM agent approach.
LLM Maturity and Security
Since LLMs are a relatively recent technology, new 
models and versions are frequently released, each 
with different capabilities. Even the same model can 
produce responses that vary over time. Since results 
are not always repeatable, justifying the reliability of 
an LLM agent for mission-critical applications is diffi-
cult. Currently, closed pretrained LLMs such as GPT-4 
are the most capable. These models are only available 
via API calls over the Internet, therefore risking infor -
mation leakage or service unavailability due to con-
nection issues. Government agencies may therefore 
require a more robust solution, such as an on-premise, 
local LLM to retain data ownership and for reproduc-
ible results.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on September 17,2026 at 15:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 
INTELLIGENT AND AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS IN GOVERNMENT
36
IEEE Intelligent Systems July/August 2025
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This article has supplementary downloadable material 
available at https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2025.3568209, 
provided by the authors. 
REFERENCES
 1. “APT40 advisory: PRC MSS tradecraft in 
action.” ACSC. Accessed: Feb. 21, 2024. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/about-
us/view-all-content/alerts-and-advisories/
apt40-advisory-prc-mss-tradecraft-in-action 
 2. “SVR cyber actors adapt tactics for initial cloud 
access.” ACSC. Accessed: Feb. 21, 2024. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/about-us/view-all 
-content/alerts-and-advisories/svr-cyber-actors-adapt 
-tactics-initial-cloud-access/ 
 3. M. Rigaki, O. Lukáš, C. A. Catania, and S. Garcia, “Out of 
the cage: How stochastic parrots win in cyber security 
environments,” 2023, arXiv:2308.12086.
 4. M. Kiely, D. Bowman, M. Standen, and C. Moir, “On 
autonomous agents in a cyber defense environment,” 
2023, arXiv:2309.07388.
 5. M. Standen, M. Lucas, D. Bowman, T. J. Richer, J. Kim, 
and D. Marriott, “CybORG: A gym for the development 
of autonomous cyber agents,” 2021, arXiv:2108.09118.
 6. A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and 
I. Sutskever, “Language models are unsupervised 
multitask learners,” OpenAI Blog, vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
 7. S. Yao et al., “Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving 
with large language models,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. 
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36, pp. 11,809–11,822.
 8. D. Driess et al., “PaLM-E: An embodied multimodal 
language model,” 2023, arXiv:2303.03378.
 9. S. Yongliang, K. Song, X. T an, D. Li, W. Lu, and Y. Zhuang, 
“HuggingGPT: Solving AI tasks with chatgpt and its 
friends in hugging face,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Neural 
Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, vol. 36, pp. 38,154–38,180.
 10. R. Fang, R. Bindu, A. Gupta, and D. Kang, “LLM agents 
can autonomously exploit one-day vulnerabilities,” 
2024, arXiv:2404.08144.
 11. P. Tempel and E. Tooley, “Found means fixed: 
Introducing code scanning autofix, powered by GitHub 
Copilot and CodeQL”. The GitHub Blog, Mar. 20, 2024. 
[Online]. Available: https://github.blog/2024-03-20 
-found-means-fixed-introducing-code-scanning 
-autofix-powered-by-github-copilot-and-codeql/
 12. C. Seifet et al. “Microsoft defender research team: 
CyberBattleSim.” GitHub. Accessed: Apr. 5, 2024. 
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/microsoft/
cyberbattlesim 
 13. G. Brockman et al., “OpenAI gym,” 2016, 
arXiv:1606.01540.
 14. T. B. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot 
learners,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. 
Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901.
 15. H. Touvron et al., “LLaMA: Open and efficient 
foundation language models,” 2023, arXiv:2302.13971.
 16. K. Hammar, N. Dhir, and R. Stadler, “Optimal defender 
strategies for CAGE-2 using causal modeling and tree 
search,” 2024, arXiv:2407 .11070.
 17. S. Yao et al., “React: Synergizing reasoning and acting 
in language models,” 2022, arXiv:2210.03629.
HAMOUN MOHAMMADI  is a graduate software engineer 
at Fivecast at Adelaide, SA, 5000, Australia and the Univer -
sity of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 5005, Australia. His research 
interests include cybersecurity, open source intelligence, 
and artificial intelligence. Mohammadi received his B.S. de-
gree in mathematical and computer sciences from the Uni-
versity of Adelaide. Contact him at hamoon.mohammadi@
gmail.com.
JONATHAN J. DAVIS is a cybersecurity researcher at Defence 
Science and Technology Group in Edinburgh, SA, 5111, Australia. 
His research interests include machine learning, cybersecurity, 
and autonomy. Davis received his Ph.D. degree in cybersecurity 
from the Queensland University of Technology. Contact him at 
jonathan.davis@dst.defence.gov.au.
MITCHELL KIEL Y is a cybersecurity researcher at Defence Sci-
ence and Technology Group in Edinburgh, SA, 5111, Australia. His 
research interests include cybersecurity and agent artificial in-
telligence. Kiely received his Honors degree in physics from the 
University of New South Wales. Contact him at mitchell.kiely@
dst.defence.gov.au. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on September 17,2026 at 15:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 