
--- PAGE 1 ---
Hierarchical Graph Representation Learning with
Differentiable Pooling
Rex Ying
rexying@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Jiaxuan You
jiaxuan@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Christopher Morris
christopher.morris@udo.edu
TU Dortmund University
Xiang Ren
xiangren@usc.edu
University of Southern California
William L. Hamilton
wleif@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Jure Leskovec
jure@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University
Abstract
Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have revolutionized the ﬁeld of graph
representation learning through effectively learned node embeddings, and achieved
state-of-the-art results in tasks such as node classiﬁcation and link prediction.
However, current GNN methods are inherently ﬂat and do not learn hierarchical
representations of graphs—a limitation that is especially problematic for the task
of graph classiﬁcation, where the goal is to predict the label associated with an
entire graph. Here we propose DIFFPOOL, a differentiable graph pooling module
that can generate hierarchical representations of graphs and can be combined with
various graph neural network architectures in an end-to-end fashion. DIFFPOOL
learns a differentiable soft cluster assignment for nodes at each layer of a deep
GNN, mapping nodes to a set of clusters, which then form the coarsened input
for the next GNN layer. Our experimental results show that combining existing
GNN methods with DIFFPOOL yields an average improvement of 5–10% accuracy
on graph classiﬁcation benchmarks, compared to all existing pooling approaches,
achieving a new state-of-the-art on four out of ﬁve benchmark data sets.
1 Introduction
In recent years there has been a surge of interest in developing graph neural networks (GNNs)—
general deep learning architectures that can operate over graph structured data, such as social network
data [16, 21, 36] or graph-based representations of molecules [7, 11, 15]. The general approach with
GNNs is to view the underlying graph as a computation graph and learn neural network primitives
that generate individual node embeddings by passing, transforming, and aggregating node feature
information across the graph [15, 16]. The generated node embeddings can then be used as input to
any differentiable prediction layer, e.g., for node classiﬁcation [16] or link prediction [32], and the
whole model can be trained in an end-to-end fashion.
However, a major limitation of current GNN architectures is that they are inherently ﬂat as they
only propagate information across the edges of the graph and are unable to infer and aggregate the
information in a hierarchical way. For example, in order to successfully encode the graph structure
of organic molecules, one would ideally want to encode the local molecular structure (e.g., individual
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Original
network
Pooled network
at level 1
Pooled network
at level 2
Graph 
classification
Pooled network
at level 3
Figure 1: High-level illustration of our proposed method DIFFPOOL. At each hierarchical layer, we
run a GNN model to obtain embeddings of nodes. We then use these learned embeddings to cluster
nodes together and run another GNN layer on this coarsened graph. This whole process is repeated
forL layers and we use the ﬁnal output representation to classify the graph.
atoms and their direct bonds) as well as the coarse-grained structure of the molecular graph (e.g.,
groups of atoms and bonds representing functional units in a molecule). This lack of hierarchical
structure is especially problematic for the task of graph classiﬁcation, where the goal is to predict
the label associated with an entire graph. When applying GNNs to graph classiﬁcation, the standard
approach is to generate embeddings for all the nodes in the graph and then to globally pool all these
node embeddings together, e.g., using a simple summation or neural network that operates over sets
[7, 11, 15, 25]. This global pooling approach ignores any hierarchical structure that might be present
in the graph, and it prevents researchers from building effective GNN models for predictive tasks
over entire graphs.
Here we propose DIFFPOOL, a differentiable graph pooling module that can be adapted to various
graph neural network architectures in an hierarchical and end-to-end fashion (Figure 1). DIFFPOOL
allows for developing deeper GNN models that can learn to operate on hierarchical representations
of a graph. We develop a graph analogue of the spatial pooling operation in CNNs [ 23], which
allows for deep CNN architectures to iteratively operate on coarser and coarser representations of
an image. The challenge in the GNN setting—compared to standard CNNs—is that graphs contain
no natural notion of spatial locality, i.e., one cannot simply pool together all nodes in a “ m×m
patch” on a graph, because the complex topological structure of graphs precludes any straightforward,
deterministic deﬁnition of a “patch”. Moreover, unlike image data, graph data sets often contain
graphs with varying numbers of nodes and edges, which makes deﬁning a general graph pooling
operator even more challenging.
In order to solve the above challenges, we require a model that learns how to cluster together nodes
to build a hierarchical multi-layer scaffold on top of the underlying graph. Our approach DIFFPOOL
learns a differentiable soft assignment at each layer of a deep GNN, mapping nodes to a set of clusters
based on their learned embeddings. In this framework, we generate deep GNNs by “stacking” GNN
layers in a hierarchical fashion (Figure 1): the input nodes at the layer l GNN module correspond
to the clusters learned at the layer l− 1 GNN module. Thus, each layer of DIFFPOOL coarsens
the input graph more and more, and DIFFPOOL is able to generate a hierarchical representation
of any input graph after training. We show that DIFFPOOL can be combined with various GNN
approaches, resulting in an average 7% gain in accuracy and a new state of the art on four out of
ﬁve benchmark graph classiﬁcation tasks. Finally, we show thatDIFFPOOL can learn interpretable
hierarchical clusters that correspond to well-deﬁned communities in the input graphs.
2 Related Work
Our work builds upon a rich line of recent research on graph neural networks and graph classiﬁcation.
General graph neural networks . A wide variety of graph neural network (GNN) models have
been proposed in recent years, including methods inspired by convolutional neural networks [ 5,
8, 11, 16, 21, 24, 29, 36], recurrent neural networks [ 25], recursive neural networks [ 1, 30] and
loopy belief propagation [7]. Most of these approaches ﬁt within the framework of “neural message
passing” proposed by Gilmer et al. [ 15]. In the message passing framework, a GNN is viewed as a
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
message passing algorithm where node representations are iteratively computed from the features
of their neighbor nodes using a differentiable aggregation function. Hamilton et al. [ 17] provides a
conceptual review of recent advancements in this area, and Bronstein et al. [4] outlines connections
to spectral graph convolutions.
Graph classiﬁcation with graph neural networks. GNNs have been applied to a wide variety of
tasks, including node classiﬁcation [16, 21], link prediction [31], graph classiﬁcation [7, 11, 40], and
chemoinformatics [28, 27, 14, 19, 32]. In the context of graph classiﬁcation—the task that we study
here—a major challenge in applying GNNs is going from node embeddings, which are the output of
GNNs, to a representation of the entire graph. Common approaches to this problem include simply
summing up or averaging all the node embeddings in a ﬁnal layer [11], introducing a “virtual node”
that is connected to all the nodes in the graph [25], or aggregating the node embeddings using a deep
learning architecture that operates over sets [15]. However, all of these methods have the limitation
that they do not learn hierarchical representations (i.e., all the node embeddings are globally pooled
together in a single layer), and thus are unable to capture the natural structures of many real-world
graphs. Some recent approaches have also proposed applying CNN architectures to the concatenation
of all the node embeddings [29, 40], but this requires a specifying (or learning) a canonical ordering
over nodes, which is in general very difﬁcult and equivalent to solving graph isomorphism.
Lastly, there are some recent works that learn hierarchical graph representations by combining GNNs
with deterministic graph clustering algorithms [8, 35, 13], following a two-stage approach. However,
unlike these previous approaches, we seek to learn the hierarchical structure in an end-to-end fashion,
rather than relying on a deterministic graph clustering subroutine.
3 Proposed Method
The key idea of DIFFPOOL is that it enables the construction of deep, multi-layer GNN models by
providing a differentiable module to hierarchically pool graph nodes. In this section, we outline the
DIFFPOOL module and show how it is applied in a deep GNN architecture.
3.1 Preliminaries
We represent a graphG as (A,F ), whereA∈{ 0, 1}n×n is the adjacency matrix, and F∈ Rn×d
is the node feature matrix assuming each node has d features.1 Given a set of labeled graphs
D ={(G1,y 1), (G2,y 2),...} whereyi∈Y is the label corresponding to graph Gi∈G , the goal
of graph classiﬁcation is to learn a mappingf :G→Y that maps graphs to the set of labels. The
challenge—compared to standard supervised machine learning setup—is that we need a way to
extract useful feature vectors from these input graphs. That is, in order to apply standard machine
learning methods for classiﬁcation, e.g., neural networks, we need a procedure to convert each graph
to an ﬁnite dimensional vector inRD.
Graph neural networks. In this work, we build upon graph neural networks in order to learn useful
representations for graph classiﬁcation in an end-to-end fashion. In particular, we consider GNNs
that employ the following general “message-passing” architecture:
H (k) =M (A,H (k−1);θ(k)), (1)
where H (k)∈ Rn×d are the node embeddings (i.e., “messages”) computed after k steps of the
GNN andM is the message propagation function, which depends on the adjacency matrix, trainable
parametersθ(k), and the node embeddings H (k−1) generated from the previous message-passing
step.2 The input node embeddingsH (0) at the initial message-passing iteration(k = 1), are initialized
using the node features on the graph,H (0) =F .
There are many possible implementations of the propagation functionM [15, 16]. For example, one
popular variant of GNNs—Kipf’s et al. [21] Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs)—implements
M using a combination of linear transformations and ReLU non-linearities:
H (k) =M (A,H (k−1);W (k)) = ReLU( ˜D− 1
2 ˜A ˜D− 1
2H (k−1)W (k−1)), (2)
1We do not consider edge features, although one can easily extend the algorithm to support edge features
using techniques introduced in [35].
2For notational convenience, we assume that the embedding dimension is d for all H (k); however, in general
this restriction is not necessary.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
where ˜A =A +I, ˜D =∑
j ˜Aij andW (k)∈ Rd×d is a trainable weight matrix. The differentiable
pooling model we propose can be applied to any GNN model implementing Equation (1), and is
agnostic with regards to the speciﬁcs of howM is implemented.
A full GNN module will runK iterations of Equation (1) to generate the ﬁnal output node embeddings
Z =H (K)∈ Rn×d, whereK is usually in the range 2-6. For simplicity, in the following sections we
will abstract away the internal structure of the GNNs and useZ = GNN(A,X ) to denote an arbitrary
GNN module implementingK iterations of message passing according to some adjacency matrixA
and initial input node featuresX.
Stacking GNNs and pooling layers. GNNs implementing Equation (1) are inherently ﬂat, as they
only propagate information across edges of a graph. The goal of this work is to deﬁne a general,
end-to-end differentiable strategy that allows one to stack multiple GNN modules in a hierarchical
fashion. Formally, given Z = GNN(A,X ), the output of a GNN module, and a graph adjacency
matrixA∈ Rn×n, we seek to deﬁne a strategy to output a new coarsened graph containingm<n
nodes, with weighted adjacency matrixA
′
∈ Rm×m and node embeddingsZ
′
∈ Rm×d. This new
coarsened graph can then be used as input to another GNN layer, and this whole process can be
repeatedL times, generating a model with L GNN layers that operate on a series of coarser and
coarser versions of the input graph (Figure 1). Thus, our goal is to learn how to cluster or pool
together nodes using the output of a GNN, so that we can use this coarsened graph as input to another
GNN layer. What makes designing such a pooling layer for GNNs especially challenging—compared
to the usual graph coarsening task—is that our goal is not to simply cluster the nodes in one graph,
but to provide a general recipe to hierarchically pool nodes across a broad set of input graphs. That is,
we need our model to learn a pooling strategy that will generalize across graphs with different nodes,
edges, and that can adapt to the various graph structures during inference.
3.2 Differentiable Pooling via Learned Assignments
Our proposed approach, DIFFPOOL, addresses the above challenges by learning a cluster assignment
matrix over the nodes using the output of a GNN model. The key intuition is that we stackL GNN
modules and learn to assign nodes to clusters at layerl in an end-to-end fashion, using embeddings
generated from a GNN at layerl− 1. Thus, we are using GNNs to both extract node embeddings that
are useful for graph classiﬁcation, as well to extract node embeddings that are useful for hierarchical
pooling. Using this construction, the GNNs in DIFFPOOL learn to encode a general pooling strategy
that is useful for a large set of training graphs. We ﬁrst describe how theDIFFPOOL module pools
nodes at each layer given an assignment matrix; following this, we discuss how we generate the
assignment matrix using a GNN architecture.
Pooling with an assignment matrix. We denote the learned cluster assignment matrix at layerl as
S(l)∈ Rnl×nl+1. Each row of S(l) corresponds to one of thenl nodes (or clusters) at layerl, and
each column ofS(l) corresponds to one of thenl+1 clusters at the next layerl + 1. Intuitively,S(l)
provides a soft assignment of each node at layerl to a cluster in the next coarsened layerl + 1.
Suppose thatS(l) has already been computed, i.e., that we have computed the assignment matrix at
thel-th layer of our model. We denote the input adjacency matrix at this layer as A(l) and denote
the input node embedding matrix at this layer as Z (l). Given these inputs, the DIFFPOOL layer
(A(l+1),X (l+1)) = DIFFPOOL (A(l),Z (l)) coarsens the input graph, generating a new coarsened
adjacency matrixA(l+1) and a new matrix of embeddingsX (l+1) for each of the nodes/clusters in
this coarsened graph. In particular, we apply the two following equations:
X (l+1) =S(l)T
Z (l)∈ Rnl+1×d, (3)
A(l+1) =S(l)T
A(l)S(l)∈ Rnl+1×nl+1. (4)
Equation (3) takes the node embeddings Z (l) and aggregates these embeddings according to the
cluster assignmentsS(l), generating embeddings for each of thenl+1 clusters. Similarly, Equation (4)
takes the adjacency matrixA(l) and generates a coarsened adjacency matrix denoting the connectivity
strength between each pair of clusters.
Through Equations (3) and (4), the DIFFPOOL layer coarsens the graph: the next layer adjacency
matrixA(l+1) represents a coarsened graph withnl+1 nodes or cluster nodes, where each individual
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
cluster node in the new coarsened graph corresponds to a cluster of nodes in the graph at layer l.
Note thatA(l+1) is a real matrix and represents a fully connected edge-weighted graph; each entry
A(l+1)
ij can be viewed as the connectivity strength between clusteri and clusterj. Similarly, thei-th
row ofX (l+1) corresponds to the embedding of clusteri. Together, the coarsened adjacency matrix
A(l+1) and cluster embeddingsX (l+1) can be used as input to another GNN layer, a process which
we describe in detail below.
Learning the assignment matrix. In the following we describe the architecture of DIFFPOOL, i.e.,
how DIFFPOOL generates the assignment matrixS(l) and embedding matricesZ (l) that are used in
Equations (3) and (4). We generate these two matrices using two separate GNNs that are both applied
to the input cluster node featuresX (l) and coarsened adjacency matrixA(l). The embedding GNN at
layerl is a standard GNN module applied to these inputs:
Z (l) = GNNl,embed(A(l),X (l)), (5)
i.e., we take the adjacency matrix between the cluster nodes at layer l (from Equation 4) and the
pooled features for the clusters (from Equation 3) and pass these matrices through a standard GNN to
get new embeddingsZ (l) for the cluster nodes. In contrast, the pooling GNN at layerl, uses the input
cluster featuresX (l) and cluster adjacency matrixA(l) to generate an assignment matrix:
S(l) = softmax
(
GNNl,pool(A(l),X (l))
)
, (6)
where the softmax function is applied in a row-wise fashion. The output dimension of GNNl,pool
corresponds to a pre-deﬁned maximum number of clusters in layerl, and is a hyperparameter of the
model.
Note that these two GNNs consume the same input data but have distinct parameterizations and play
separate roles: The embedding GNN generates new embeddings for the input nodes at this layer,
while the pooling GNN generates a probabilistic assignment of the input nodes tonl+1 clusters.
In the base case, the inputs to Equations (5) and Equations (6) at layerl = 0 are simply the input
adjacency matrixA and the node featuresF for the original graph. At the penultimate layer L− 1 of
a deep GNN model using DIFFPOOL, we set the assignment matrixS(L−1) be a vector of 1’s, i.e.,
all nodes at the ﬁnal layerL are assigned to a single cluster, generating a ﬁnal embedding vector
corresponding to the entire graph. This ﬁnal output embedding can then be used as feature input to a
differentiable classiﬁer (e.g., a softmax layer), and the entire system can be trained end-to-end using
stochastic gradient descent.
Permutation invariance. Note that in order to be useful for graph classiﬁcation, the pooling layer
should be invariant under node permutations. For DIFFPOOL we get the following positive result,
which shows that any deep GNN model based on DIFFPOOL is permutation invariant, as long as the
component GNNs are permutation invariant.
Proposition 1. Let P ∈ {0, 1}n×n be any permutation matrix, then DIFFPOOL (A,Z ) =
DIFFPOOL (PAP T,PX ) as long as GNN(A,X ) = GNN(PAP T,X ) (i.e., as long as the GNN
method used is permutation invariant).
Proof. Equations (5) and (6) are permutation invariant by the assumption that the GNN module
is permutation invariant. And since any permutation matrix is orthogonal, applying P TP = I to
Equation (3) and (4) ﬁnishes the proof.
3.3 Auxiliary Link Prediction Objective and Entropy Regularization
In practice, it can be difﬁcult to train the pooling GNN (Equation 4) using only gradient signal from
the graph classiﬁcation task. Intuitively, we have a non-convex optimization problem and it can be
difﬁcult to push the pooling GNN away from spurious local minima early in training. To alleviate
this issue, we train the pooling GNN with an auxiliary link prediction objective, which encodes the
intuition that nearby nodes should be pooled together. In particular, at each layer l, we minimize
LLP =||A(l),S (l)S(l)T
||F , where||·|| F denotes the Frobenius norm. Note that the adjacency matrix
A(l) at deeper layers is a function of lower level assignment matrices, and changes during training.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
Another important characteristic of the pooling GNN (Equation 4) is that the output cluster assignment
for each node should generally be close to a one-hot vector, so that the membership for each cluster
or subgraph is clearly deﬁned. We therefore regularize the entropy of the cluster assignment by
minimizingLE = 1
n
∑n
i=1H(Si), whereH denotes the entropy function, andSi is thei-th row ofS.
During training, LLP andLE from each layer are added to the classiﬁcation loss. In practice we
observe that training with the side objective takes longer to converge, but nevertheless achieves better
performance and more interpretable cluster assignments.
4 Experiments
We evaluate the beneﬁts of DIFFPOOL against a number of state-of-the-art graph classiﬁcation
approaches, with the goal of answering the following questions:
Q1 How does DIFFPOOL compare to other pooling methods proposed for GNNs (e.g., using sort
pooling [40] or the SET2S ET method [15])?
Q2 How does DIFFPOOL combined with GNNs compare to the state-of-the-art for graph classiﬁca-
tion task, including both GNNs and kernel-based methods?
Q3 Does DIFFPOOL compute meaningful and interpretable clusters on the input graphs?
Data sets. To probe the ability of DIFFPOOL to learn complex hierarchical structures from graphs in
different domains, we evaluate on a variety of relatively large graph data sets chosen from benchmarks
commonly used in graph classiﬁcation [20]. We use protein data sets including ENZYMES , PRO-
TEINS [3, 12], D&D [10], the social network data set REDDIT -MULTI -12 K [39], and the scientiﬁc
collaboration data set COLLAB [39]. See Appendix A for statistics and properties. For all these data
sets, we perform 10-fold cross-validation to evaluate model performance, and report the accuracy
averaged over 10 folds.
Model conﬁgurations. In our experiments, the GNN model used for DIFFPOOL is built on top of
the GRAPH SAGE architecture, as we found this architecture to have superior performance compared
to the standard GCN approach as introduced in [21]. We use the “mean” variant of GRAPH SAGE [16]
and apply a DIFFPOOL layer after every two GRAPH SAGE layers in our architecture. A total of 2
DIFFPOOL layers are used for the datasets. For small datasets such as ENZYMES , PROTEINS and
COLLAB , 1 DIFFPOOL layer can achieve similar performance. After each DIFFPOOL layer, 3 layers
of graph convolutions are performed, before the next DIFFPOOL layer, or the readout layer. The
embedding matrix and the assignment matrix are computed by two separate GRAPH SAGE models
respectively. In the 2 DIFFPOOL layer architecture, the number of clusters is set as25% of the number
of nodes before applying DIFFPOOL, while in the 1 DIFFPOOL layer architecture, the number of
clusters is set as 10%. Batch normalization [18] is applied after every layer of GRAPH SAGE. We also
found that adding anℓ2 normalization to the node embeddings at each layer made the training more
stable. In Section 4.2, we also test an analogous variant of DIFFPOOL on the STRUCTURE 2V EC [7]
architecture, in order to demonstrate how DIFFPOOL can be applied on top of other GNN models.
All models are trained for 3 000 epochs with early stopping applied when the validation loss starts to
drop. We also evaluate two simpliﬁed versions of DIFFPOOL:
• DIFFPOOL -D ET, is a DIFFPOOL model where assignment matrices are generated using a deter-
ministic graph clustering algorithm [9].
• DIFFPOOL -NOLP is a variant of DIFFPOOL where the link prediction side objective is turned off.
4.1 Baseline Methods
In the performance comparison on graph classiﬁcation, we consider baselines based upon GNNs
(combined with different pooling methods) as well as state-of-the-art kernel-based approaches.
GNN-based methods.
• GRAPH SAGE with global mean-pooling [16]. Other GNN variants such as those proposed in [21]
are omitted as empirically GraphSAGE obtained higher performance in the task.
• STRUCTURE 2V EC (S2V ) [7] is a state-of-the-art graph representation learning algorithm that
combines a latent variable model with GNNs. It uses global mean pooling.
• Edge-conditioned ﬁlters in CNN for graphs (ECC ) [35] incorporates edge information into the
GCN model and performs pooling using a graph coarsening algorithm.
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Table 1: Classiﬁcation accuracies in percent. The far-right column gives the relative increase in
accuracy compared to the baseline GRAPH SAGE approach.
Method Data Set
ENZYMES D&D R EDDIT-MULTI-12K COLLAB PROTEINS Gain
Kernel
GRAPHLET 41.03 74.85 21.73 64.66 72.91
SHORTEST-PATH 42.32 78.86 36.93 59.10 76.43
1-WL 53.43 74.02 39.03 78.61 73.76
WL-OA 60.13 79.04 44.38 80.74 75.26
PATCHYSAN – 76.27 41.32 72.60 75.00 4.17
GNN
GRAPHSAGE 54.25 75.42 42.24 68.25 70.48 –
ECC 53.50 74.10 41.73 67.79 72.65 0.11
SET2SET 60.15 78.12 43.49 71.75 74.29 3.32
SORTPOOL 57.12 79.37 41.82 73.76 75.54 3.39
DIFFPOOL-DET 58.33 75.47 46.18 82.13 75.62 5.42
DIFFPOOL-NOLP 61.95 79.98 46.65 75.58 76.22 5.95
DIFFPOOL 62.53 80.64 47.08 75.48 76.25 6.27
• PATCHY SAN [29] deﬁnes a receptive ﬁeld (neighborhood) for each node, and using a canonical
node ordering, applies convolutions on linear sequences of node embeddings.
• SET2SET replaces the global mean-pooling in the traditional GNN architectures by the aggrega-
tion used in SET2SET [38]. Set2Set aggregation has been shown to perform better than mean
pooling in previous work [15]. We use GRAPH SAGE as the base GNN model.
• SORTPOOL [40] applies a GNN architecture and then performs a single layer of soft pooling
followed by 1D convolution on sorted node embeddings.
For all the GNN baselines, we use 10-fold cross validation numbers reported by the original authors
when possible. For the GRAPH SAGE and SET2S ET baselines, we use the base implementation and
hyperparameter sweeps as in our DIFFPOOL approach. When baseline approaches did not have the
necessary published numbers, we contacted the original authors and used their code (if available) to
run the model, performing a hyperparameter search based on the original author’s guidelines.
Kernel-based algorithms. We use the GRAPHLET [34], the SHORTEST -PATH [2], WEISFEILER -
LEHMAN kernel (WL) [33], and WEISFEILER -L EHMAN OPTIMAL ASSIGNMENT KERNEL (WL-
OA) [22] as kernel baselines. For each kernel, we computed the normalized gram matrix. We
computed the classiﬁcation accuracies using the C-SVM implementation of LIBSVM [6], using
10-fold cross validation. TheC parameter was selected from{10−3, 10−2,..., 102, 103} by 10-fold
cross validation on the training folds. Moreover, for WL and WL-OA we additionally selected the
number of iteration from{0,..., 5}.
4.2 Results for Graph Classiﬁcation
Table 1 compares the performance ofDIFFPOOL to these state-of-the-art graph classiﬁcation baselines.
These results provide positive answers to our motivating questions Q1 and Q2: We observe that
our DIFFPOOL approach obtains the highest average performance among all pooling approaches for
GNNs, improves upon the base GRAPH SAGE architecture by an average of 6.27%, and achieves state-
of-the-art results on 4 out of 5 benchmarks. Interestingly, our simpliﬁed model variant,DIFFPOOL -
DET, achieves state-of-the-art performance on the COLLAB benchmark. This is because many
collaboration graphs in COLLAB show only single-layer community structures, which can be captured
well with pre-computed graph clustering algorithm [9]. One observation is that despite signiﬁcant
performance improvement, DIFFPOOL could be unstable to train, and there is signiﬁcant variation
in accuracy across different runs, even with the same hyperparameter setting. It is observed that
adding the link predictioin objective makes training more stable, and reduces the standard deviation
of accuracy across different runs.
Differentiable Pooling on STRUCTURE 2V EC. DIFFPOOL can be applied to other GNN architec-
tures besides GRAPH SAGE to capture hierarchical structure in the graph data. To further support
answering Q1, we also applied DIFFPOOL on Structure2Vec (S2V). We ran experiments using S2V
with three layer architecture, as reported in [7]. In the ﬁrst variant, oneDIFFPOOL layer is applied
after the ﬁrst layer ofS2V, and two more S2V layers are stacked on top of the output of DIFFPOOL.
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
The second variant applies one DIFFPOOL layer after the ﬁrst and second layer ofS2V respectively.
In both variants, S2V model is used to compute the embedding matrix, while GRAPH SAGE model is
used to compute the assignment matrix.
Table 2: Accuracy results of applying DIFFPOOL to S2V.
Data Set Method
S2V S2V WITH1 DIFFPOOL S2VWITH2 DIFFPOOL
ENZYMES 61.10 62.86 63.33
D&D 78.92 80.75 82.07
The results in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy are summarized in Table 2. We observe thatDIFFPOOL
signiﬁcantly improves the performance of S2V on both ENZYMES and D&D data sets. Similar
performance trends are also observed on other data sets. The results demonstrate that DIFFPOOL is a
general strategy to pool over hierarchical structure that can beneﬁt different GNN architectures.
Running time. Although applying DIFFPOOL requires additional computation of an assignment
matrix, we observed that DIFFPOOL did not incur substantial additional running time in practice. This
is because each DIFFPOOL layer reduces the size of graphs by extracting a coarser representation of
the graph, which speeds up the graph convolution operation in the next layer. Concretely, we found
that GRAPH SAGE with DIFFPOOL was 12× faster than the GRAPH SAGE model with SET2S ET
pooling, while still achieving signiﬁcantly higher accuracy on all benchmarks.
4.3 Analysis of Cluster Assignment in D IFFPOOL
Hierarchical cluster structure. To address Q3, we investigated the extent to which DIFFPOOL
learns meaningful node clusters by visualizing the cluster assignments in different layers. Figure
2 shows such a visualization of node assignments in the ﬁrst and second layers on a graph from
COLLAB data set, where node color indicates its cluster membership. Node cluster membership
is determined by taking the argmax of its cluster assignment probabilities. We observe that even
when learning cluster assignment based solely on the graph classiﬁcation objective, DIFFPOOL
can still capture the hierarchical community structure. We also observe signiﬁcant improvement in
membership assignment quality with link prediction auxiliary objectives.
Dense vs. sparse subgraph structure . In addition, we observe that DIFFPOOL learns to collapse
nodes into soft clusters in a non-uniform way, with a tendency to collapse densely-connected
subgraphs into clusters. Since GNNs can efﬁciently perform message-passing on dense, clique-like
subgraphs (due to their small diameters) [26], pooling together nodes in such a dense subgraph is not
likely to lead to any loss of structural information. This intuitively explains why collapsing dense
subgraphs is a useful pooling strategy forDIFFPOOL. In contrast, sparse subgraphs may contain many
interesting structures, including path-, cycle- and tree-like structures, and given the high-diameter
induced by sparsity, GNN message-passing may fail to capture these structures. Thus, by separately
pooling distinct parts of a sparse subgraph, DIFFPOOL can learn to capture the meaningful structures
present in sparse graph regions (e.g., as in Figure 2).
Assignment for nodes with similar representations. Since the assignment network computes the
soft cluster assignment based on features of input nodes and their neighbors, nodes with both similar
input features and neighborhood structure will have similar cluster assignment. In fact, one can
construct synthetic cases where 2 nodes, although far away, have exactly the same neighborhood
structure and features for self and all neighbors. In this case the pooling network is forced to assign
them into the same cluster, which is different from the concept of pooling in other architectures such
as image ConvNets. In some cases we do observe that disconnected nodes are pooled together.
In practice we rely on the identiﬁability assumption similar to Theorem 1 in GraphSAGE [ 16],
where nodes are identiﬁable via their features. This holds in many real datasets 3. The auxiliary
link prediction objective is observed to also help discouraging nodes that are far away to be pooled
together. Furthermore, it is possible to use more sophisticated GNN aggregation function such as
3However, some chemistry molecular graph datasets contain many nodes that are structurally similar, and
assignment network is observed to pool together nodes that are far away.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Pooling at Layer 1 Pooling at Layer 2
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 2: Visualization of hierarchical cluster assignment in DIFFPOOL, using example graphs from
COLLAB . The left ﬁgure (a) shows hierarchical clustering over two layers, where nodes in the second
layer correspond to clusters in the ﬁrst layer. (Colors are used to connect the nodes/clusters across the
layers, and dotted lines are used to indicate clusters.) The right two plots (b and c) show two more
examples ﬁrst-layer clusters in different graphs. Note that although we globally set the number of
clusters to be 25% of the nodes, the assignment GNN automatically learns the appropriate number of
meaningful clusters to assign for these different graphs.
high-order moments [37] to distinguish nodes that are similar in structure and feature space. The
overall framework remains unchanged.
Sensitivity of the Pre-deﬁned Maximum Number of Clusters . We found that the assignment
varies according to the depth of the network andC, the maximum number of clusters. With largerC,
the pooling GNN can model more complex hierarchical structure. The trade-off is that very large
C results in more noise and less efﬁciency. Although the value ofC is a pre-deﬁned parameter, the
pooling net learns to use the appropriate number of clusters by end-to-end training. In particular,
some clusters might not be used by the assignment matrix. Column corresponding to unused cluster
has low values for all nodes. This is observed in Figure 2(c), where nodes are assigned predominantly
into 3 clusters.
5 Conclusion
We introduced a differentiable pooling method for GNNs that is able to extract the complex hierarchi-
cal structure of real-world graphs. By using the proposed pooling layer in conjunction with existing
GNN models, we achieved new state-of-the-art results on several graph classiﬁcation benchmarks.
Interesting future directions include learning hard cluster assignments to further reduce computational
cost in higher layers while also ensuring differentiability, and applying the hierarchical pooling
method to other downstream tasks that require modeling of the entire graph structure.
Acknowledgement
This research has been supported in part by DARPA SIMPLEX, Stanford Data Science Initiative,
Huawei, JD and Chan Zuckerberg Biohub. Christopher Morris is funded by the German Science
Foundation (DFG) within the Collaborative Research Center SFB 876 “Providing Information by
Resource-Constrained Data Analysis”, project A6 “Resource-efﬁcient Graph Mining”. The authors
also thank Marinka Zitnik for help in visualizing the high-level illustration of the proposed methods.
References
[1] M. Bianchini, M. Gori, and F. Scarselli. Processing directed acyclic graphs with recursive neural
networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 12(6):1464–1470, 2001.
[2] K. M. Borgwardt and H.-P. Kriegel. Shortest-path kernels on graphs. In IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining, pages 74–81, 2005.
[3] K. M. Borgwardt, C. S. Ong, S. Schönauer, S. V . N. Vishwanathan, A. J. Smola, and H.-
P. Kriegel. Protein function prediction via graph kernels. Bioinformatics, 21(Supplement
1):i47–i56, 2005.
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
[4] M. M. Bronstein, J. Bruna, Y . LeCun, A. Szlam, and P. Vandergheynst. Geometric deep learning:
Going beyond euclidean data. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(4):18–42, 2017.
[5] J. Bruna, W. Zaremba, A. Szlam, and Y . LeCun. Spectral networks and deep locally connected
networks on graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
[6] C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines. ACM Transactions
on Intelligent Systems and Technology , 2:27:1–27:27, 2011. Software available at http:
//www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm.
[7] H. Dai, B. Dai, and L. Song. Discriminative embeddings of latent variable models for structured
data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2702–2711, 2016.
[8] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst. Convolutional neural networks on graphs
with fast localized spectral ﬁltering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 3844–3852, 2016.
[9] I. S. Dhillon, Y . Guan, and B. Kulis. Weighted graph cuts without eigenvectors a multilevel
approach. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 29(11):1944–1957,
2007.
[10] P. D. Dobson and A. J. Doig. Distinguishing enzyme structures from non-enzymes without
alignments. Journal of Molecular Biology, 330(4):771 – 783, 2003.
[11] D. K. Duvenaud, D. Maclaurin, J. Iparraguirre, R. Bombarell, T. Hirzel, A. Aspuru-Guzik,
and R. P. Adams. Convolutional networks on graphs for learning molecular ﬁngerprints. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2224–2232, 2015.
[12] A. Feragen, N. Kasenburg, J. Petersen, M. D. Bruijne, and K. M. Borgwardt. Scalable kernels
for graphs with continuous attributes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 216–224, 2013. Erratum available at http://image.diku.dk/aasa/papers/
graphkernels_nips_erratum.pdf.
[13] M. Fey, J. E. Lenssen, F. Weichert, and H. Müller. SplineCNN: Fast geometric deep learning with
continuous B-spline kernels. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2018.
[14] A. Fout, J. Byrd, B. Shariat, and A. Ben-Hur. Protein interface prediction using graph convo-
lutional networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 6533–6542,
2017.
[15] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl. Neural message passing
for quantum chemistry. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1263–1272,
2017.
[16] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1025–1035, 2017.
[17] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Representation learning on graphs: Methods and
applications. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 40(3):52–74, 2017.
[18] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
internal covariate shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 448–456,
2015.
[19] W. Jin, C. W. Coley, R. Barzilay, and T. S. Jaakkola. Predicting organic reaction outcomes with
Weisfeiler-Lehman network. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
2604–2613, 2017.
[20] K. Kersting, N. M. Kriege, C. Morris, P. Mutzel, and M. Neumann. Benchmark data sets for
graph kernels, 2016.
[21] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional networks.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
[22] N. M. Kriege, P.-L. Giscard, and R. Wilson. On valid optimal assignment kernels and appli-
cations to graph classiﬁcation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
1623–1631, 2016.
[23] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional
neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1097–1105,
2012.
[24] T. Lei, W. Jin, R. Barzilay, and T. S. Jaakkola. Deriving neural architectures from sequence and
graph kernels. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2024–2033, 2017.
[25] Y . Li, D. Tarlow, M. Brockschmidt, and R. Zemel. Gated graph sequence neural networks. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
[26] R. Liao, M. Brockschmidt, D. Tarlow, A. L. Gaunt, R. Urtasun, and R. Zemel. Graph partition
neural networks for semi-supervised classiﬁcation. InInternational Conference on Learning
Representations (Workshop Track), 2018.
[27] A. Lusci, G. Pollastri, and P. Baldi. Deep architectures and deep learning in chemoinformatics:
The prediction of aqueous solubility for drug-like molecules. Journal of Chemical Information
and Modeling, 53(7):1563–1575, 2013.
[28] C. Merkwirth and T. Lengauer. Automatic generation of complementary descriptors with
molecular graph networks. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 45(5):1159–1168,
2005.
[29] M. Niepert, M. Ahmed, and K. Kutzkov. Learning convolutional neural networks for graphs. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2014–2023, 2016.
[30] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini. The graph neural
network model. Transactions on Neural Networks, 20(1):61–80, 2009.
[31] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. van den Berg, I. Titov, and M. Welling. Modeling
relational data with graph convolutional networks. In Extended Semantic Web Conference,
2018.
[32] K. Schütt, P. J. Kindermans, H. E. Sauceda, S. Chmiela, A. Tkatchenko, and K. R. Müller.
SchNet: A continuous-ﬁlter convolutional neural network for modeling quantum interactions.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 992–1002, 2017.
[33] N. Shervashidze, P. Schweitzer, E. J. van Leeuwen, K. Mehlhorn, and K. M. Borgwardt.
Weisfeiler-Lehman graph kernels. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12:2539–2561,
2011.
[34] N. Shervashidze, S. V . N. Vishwanathan, T. H. Petri, K. Mehlhorn, and K. M. Borgwardt.
Efﬁcient graphlet kernels for large graph comparison. InInternational Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics, pages 488–495, 2009.
[35] M. Simonovsky and N. Komodakis. Dynamic edge-conditioned ﬁlters in convolutional neural
networks on graphs. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
29–38, 2017.
[36] P. Veliˇckovi´c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y . Bengio. Graph attention
networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[37] S. Verma and Z.-L. Zhang. Graph capsule convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.08090, 2018.
[38] O. Vinyals, S. Bengio, and M. Kudlur. Order matters: Sequence to sequence for sets. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
[39] P. Yanardag and S. V . N. Vishwanathan. A structural smoothing framework for robust graph
comparison. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2134–2142, 2015.
[40] M. Zhang, Z. Cui, M. Neumann, and Y . Chen. An end-to-end deep learning architecture for
graph classiﬁcation. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018.
11