
--- PAGE 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-05182437
https://hal.science/hal-05182437v1
Submitted on 23 Jul 2025
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est des-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Copyright - All rights reserved
Scalable and Generalizable RL Agents for Attack Path
Discovery via Continuous Invariant Spaces
Franco Terranova, Abdelkader Lahmadi, Isabelle Chrisment
To cite this version:
Franco Terranova, Abdelkader Lahmadi, Isabelle Chrisment. Scalable and Generalizable RL Agents
for Attack Path Discovery via Continuous Invariant Spaces. 2025 28th International Symposium on
Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses (RAID), Oct 2025, Gold Coast, Australia. pp.440-457,
⟨10.1109/RAID67961.2025.00029⟩. ⟨hal-05182437⟩

--- PAGE 2 ---
Scalable and Generalizable RL Agents for Attack
Path Discovery via Continuous Invariant Spaces
Franco Terranova
Université de Lorraine, CNRS,
Inria, LORIA
Nancy, France
franco.terranova@inria.fr
Abdelkader Lahmadi
Université de Lorraine, CNRS,
Inria, LORIA
Nancy, France
abdelkader.lahmadi@loria.fr
Isabelle Chrisment
Université de Lorraine, CNRS,
Inria, LORIA
Nancy, France
isabelle.chrisment@loria.fr
Abstract—Identifying critical attack paths in a net-
work—sequences of vulnerabilities an attacker can chain to
achieve a specific threat model—is crucial for pinpointing vul-
nerable areas where defensive measures should be focused.
Recently, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has gained traction for
training agents in identifying these critical paths. However,
current solutions typically train RL agents tailored to a spe-
cific environment—defined by a fixed network structure and
vulnerability set—requiring costly retraining whenever either
changes. This limitation arises from optimizing the agent to
map between discrete input and output spaces, treating network
nodes and vulnerabilities as atomic discrete elements. In this
paper, we propose a method for constructing continuous and
invariant input and output spaces for RL agents, enabling them to
learn transferable policies that generalize across diverse network
configurations and vulnerability sets. We also release Continuous
CyberBattleSim (C-CyberBattleSim), an enhanced version of Mi-
crosoft CyberBattleSim designed to train agents with the novel
continuous spaces. The tool is further extended to integrate real-
world vulnerability data and a new scenario generation pipeline
to improve the realism of training and testing environments.
Agents trained in continuous spaces are assessed in 800 scenarios
with varying sizes and various allocations of 829 real-world
vulnerabilities, demonstrating an average improvement of 9.3x in
scalability against agents trained in discrete spaces, as well as an
average generalization score of 89% to more complex scenarios
when trained in simpler scenarios. A final study evaluates
whether continuous agents trained in simulation can adapt to
real-world and emulated scans. On average, agents achieve 75%
of the score they would have if trained directly on the scans,
demonstrating effective knowledge transfer.
Index Terms —Deep Reinforcement Learning, Attack Path
Discovery, Invariant Agents, Continuous Spaces, Simulation En-
vironments
I. I NTRODUCTION
Attackers typically infiltrate networks in a systematic man-
ner, exploiting chains of vulnerabilities across multiple hosts to
accomplish specific malicious objectives [16]. These vulnera-
bilities are inherent in network device services, configurations,
and operating systems, often existing in large numbers. Con-
sequently, prioritization is often necessary to allocate limited
defensive resources effectively to the most critical areas, such
as prioritizing vulnerabilities for patching [37]. Specifically,
understanding how vulnerabilities interact within networks to
create attack paths and how these interactions enable attackers
to achieve their goals remains a significant challenge. The
process of identifying such attack paths is also known as
multistage attack prediction [24], and can help organizations
strengthen their security position. In particular, attack detection
systems that simulate and anticipate potential threats are clas-
sified as proactive methods [24]. Historically, these methods
have relied on expert-driven manual penetration testing (PT)
[49]. Although effective for simple network scenarios, PT
struggles to scale to large dynamic scenarios, where the expo-
nential growth of vulnerabilities and nodes makes it imprac-
tical to manually evaluate all potential paths. For this reason,
automation has become essential to complement human exper-
tise. Early solutions developed attack graph generation tools
[50] as an automated approach to enumerate all potential attack
paths based on network configurations. They subsequently
require prioritization algorithms to identify the most critical
paths among the many possibilities. However, pre-enumerating
all paths in advance reintroduced scalability challenges [11].
More recent research is shifting to the use of machine learning
(ML) as a proactive approach aimed at directly identifying
the most critical attack paths based on network configurations
in input, addressing scalability issues by recognizing that the
most critical paths are those of primary interest. Reinforcement
Learning (RL) [53] has emerged as the key ML paradigm
for this task, as it enables models to implement sequential
decision-making strategies that align with attackers’ behavior
when selecting vulnerability sequences. More precisely, the
RL paradigm trains an agent to take optimal actions across
various observations of an environment. In our context, actions
represent the selection of critical nodes and vulnerabilities
within evolving network configurations, with the evolution
driven by previous vulnerability selections. The set of all
possible observations and actions forms the observation and
action spaces, with RL agents trained to learn mappings
within these spaces. Training such agents to find valuable
mappings is typically conducted in simulation environments
that should closely approximate real-world scenarios, as direct
interaction with actual systems or their emulations is often
cost-prohibitive [58]. In general, the effectiveness of RL agents
is significantly influenced by the realism of training environ-
ments and the selection of appropriate observation and action
spaces. Enhancing these aspects is crucial for developing a
scalable and generalizable model that is trained once and can

--- PAGE 3 ---
generalize to diverse and new scenarios without retraining.
This aligns with the principles of artificial narrow intelligence
(ANI) [41], which seeks to create models capable of handling
all scenarios for a specific task. This paper proposes two
contributions to overcome the limitations posing a barrier to
reaching these goals:
Environment: The lack of realism in existing simulation
environments hinders agents’ ability to learn meaningful
real-world behaviors, highlighting a sim-to-real gap [35],
driven by two key issues: (1) simulated training scenar-
ios are often generated with a limited set of randomly
assigned vulnerabilities, leading to unrealistic scenarios,
and (2) simplistic simulation of vulnerability exploitation
distorts the concept of optimality, causing RL agents to
learn the selection of suboptimal actions.
Solution: To address these challenges, we introduce
an enhanced simulation environment, Continuous Cy-
berBattleSim (C-CyberBattleSim), built upon Microsoft’s
CyberBattleSim tool [54]. This enhanced environment:
(1) allows querying of Cyber-Threat Intelligence (CTI)
tools [9] and vulnerability databases to gather real-world
statistics via custom queries, and uses these statistics to
allocate vulnerabilities in the generated scenarios; and (2)
introduces a new pipeline that automates the prediction of
vulnerability outcomes based on vulnerability metadata,
shifting the responsibility of redefining the simulation
away from humans. The paper provides a link to the
C-CyberBattleSim environment repository 1, enabling re-
searchers to replicate the methodology and the experi-
ments. In addition, it gives access to the data, generated
scenarios, and trained models used in the study 2.
RL Agent: Previous studies in this field have relied on dis-
crete observation and action spaces for RL agents, where
network nodes and vulnerabilities are represented as
discrete elements. Agents are then trained to find the link
between these elements in a specific order to identify the
most critical attack paths, but only relative to the training
vulnerability set and network structure. As a result, within
the constraints of the RL framework for discrete spaces,
modifying the spaces requires retraining the RL agent.
This limits, by construction, the generalization of RL
agents to new scenarios, since in the cyber-attack path
prediction task, the network structure and vulnerability
set typically differ across application scenarios. Addition-
ally, agents struggle with dynamicity in the environment,
as changes in the network nodes or vulnerabilities ne-
cessitate modifications to the spaces. Moreover, as the
number of nodes or vulnerabilities increases, the discrete
spaces expand, resulting in scalability issues since the
complexity of the mappings to learn grows.
Solution: To address this, we propose a novel approach
to achieve scenario independence by redefining the spaces
of the RL agent from discrete to continuous ones. In
1C-CyberBattleSim: https://github.com/terranovafr/C-CyberBattleSim
2Data: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14604651
our approach, actions and observations are represented
as fixed-dimensional vectors that capture their semantics,
with agents trained to find mappings between these
semantic spaces. To create these spaces, we design a
world model [20] that maps the discrete elements of the
specific application scenarios as points in the continuous
observation and action spaces. This intermediate world
model is designed to ensure that the agent can operate
within the same continuous spaces, even when the net-
work environment and vulnerabilities change, and ensure
that semantics are present, allowing the generalization of
RL agents trained on top. To build these semantically
meaningful and continuous spaces, we leverage intelligent
models, and in particular Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
[59] to represent nodes and the network graph in these
spaces, and Language Models (LMs) [61] to represent
vulnerabilities based on their textual descriptions.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 covers back-
ground on ML solutions and cybersecurity data sources.
Section 3 reviews related work and its limitations. Section 4
presents our end-to-end methodology, followed by experiments
in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 explores the potential real-
world applicability, while Section 7 concludes with sugges-
tions for future research directions.
II. B ACKGROUND
This section introduces RL and explores its application to
both discrete and continuous spaces. We then discuss how
GNNs and LMs can represent environment elements, such as
network graphs, nodes, and vulnerabilities, as embeddings in
continuous spaces. Additionally, we explore the cybersecurity
data sources used to create environments for agent training.
A. Reinforcement Learning
RL is a key ML paradigm designed to develop autonomous
agents that learn optimal behaviors within a given environ-
ment. The paradigm involves an agent operating in a state st,
taking action at, and receiving feedback as a new state st+1
and reward rt+1 from the environment. The environment is
typically modeled using a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
[43] defined across its elements by a state space S and
an action space A. Partially Observable MDPs (POMDPs)
[34] extend MDPs to scenarios with incomplete information,
utilizing an observation space O instead of the state space S,
enabling learning in partially visible environments. They are
particularly valuable in environments designed for progressive
discovery, as is often the case in graph-based exploration tasks.
The primary goal of the RL framework is to learn an optimal
policy π (Equation 1), which maps observations (or states) to
actions, guiding the agent’s behavior within the environment.
π : O → A such that max
π
Eτ ∼π [R(τ )] (1)
An episode denoted as τ, typically consists of sequences
of states, actions, and rewards, τ = ( s0, a0, r1, s1, a1, . . .).
The optimization is achieved by maximizing the expected
return R(τ ), defined as R(τ ) = PN
k=0 γkrt+k+1, where N

--- PAGE 4 ---
represents the episode length, and γ determines the trade-
off between immediate and future rewards, ensuring that
future outcomes influence the agent’s decisions and that the
optimization accounts for the long-term impact of actions.
Policy learning in RL occurs through trial and error, refining
actions based on rewards, with algorithms differing in their
optimization approaches. Deep RL (DRL) enhances RL by
employing Neural Networks (NNs) [57] as function approxi-
mators for the policy, with input and output layers designed
to match the observation and action spaces. For this reason,
the representation of observation and action spaces signifi-
cantly impacts the generalization and scalability of the trained
agent. These spaces can be either discrete or continuous, each
shaping the policy structure, as well as how the policy learns
mappings.
1) Discrete Spaces: In discrete optimization tasks, the RL
environment is generally composed of a set of discrete choices
(e.g., grid cells, graph nodes) on top of which the agent can
act. The typical approach to solving these problems with the
RL framework is to leverage discrete observation and action
spaces. The observation vector provided by the environment
is typically designed to represent the set of discrete choices
available, with its size proportional to their number. Let N
be the number of discrete elements and f be the number of
features per element. The observation vector can be expressed
as o ∈ RN ×f . The agent is then trained to output a vector that
assigns a score or quality value to each possible action, with
the vector size typically determined by the number of discrete
choices. Let |A| denote the number of possible discrete actions
per element. The policy maps observations to an action space,
with both input and output dimensions depending on the task.
This mapping can be abstractly written as in Equation 2.
π : RN ×f → Rf (N,|A|) (2)
The function f (N, |A|) defines the dimensionality of the
action space; for example, if the task involves selecting a single
element and an action, then f (N, |A|) = N × |A|, while if it
involves selecting pairs of elements and an action on each pair,
then f (N, |A|) = N ×N ×|A|. In this context, the observation
and action spaces scale with the number of discrete choices,
and in DRL, the NN’s input and output layers must match
these dimensions—resulting in models specialized for fixed-
size vectors and learning order-dependent patterns. In some
discrete optimization tasks, the set of discrete choices remains
unchanged across all scenarios, making RL within discrete
spaces an ideal framework. For example, in chess [51], the
board size (observation space) and possible moves (action
space) are often fixed. However, in tasks where the number
and order of discrete choices vary—such as graph-based
optimization problems—discrete RL presents limitations. A
common approach used is padding, which involves resizing
the observation and action vectors to match the largest set of
discrete choices across all scenarios. However, this approach
still preserves order-dependent patterns and results in overly
large vectors when the maximum scenario size is significantly
larger than most instances, hindering the learning process.
2) Continuous Spaces: Recent studies in RL research [13]
[17] propose solving discrete optimization problems using
continuous embedding observation and action spaces created
with a world model. The goal is to enable the agent to
process a fixed-dimensional input vector and map it to a fixed-
dimensional output vector, regardless of the number of discrete
choices in a given scenario. This should be achieved while
maintaining order invariance, ensuring that the vector remains
the same regardless of how the order of discrete elements
is rearranged. When using DRL, this also makes the NN
representing the policy scenario-agnostic, allowing the same
model to be applied across different problem settings. It is
important to note that the fixed-dimensionality problem can
also be addressed using a compressed, discrete representation.
However, continuous embeddings are more commonly used,
as discrete spaces remain less explored due to the difficulties
they present for gradient-based optimization [38]. To handle
discrete optimization problems in fixed-dimensional continu-
ous spaces, all discrete elements must be mapped to these
spaces accordingly. To better align with the context of our
study, one possible formulation of a world model comprises
the following three key components:
• Observation mapping function: Transforms the environ-
ment’s observation (state) into a fixed-dimensional vector,
serving as the agent’s input.
• Action mapping function: Represents all discrete actions
as points in a fixed-dimensional continuous action space.
The agent is subsequently tasked to generate continuous
action points within this space.
• Proximity-based selection strategy : Uses proximity
methods (e.g., nearest-neighbor) to map the agent’s out-
put vector to the closest discrete action point [13] [22].
For this approach to be effective, the continuous spaces must
have semantic meaning—similar observations and actions
should be positioned close together. Therefore, the mapping
functions must ensure this semantic structure. However, a
major challenge remains: world models and their mapping
functions to build embedding representations must be tailored
to the specific application, as their design depends on the
structure and semantics of both the environment observation
space and the discrete action set. For example, [62] introduces
an embedding-based mapping specifically for the single-host
penetration testing task, while [13] presents a solution applied
to the classic CartPole environment.
B. Representation Learning
Emerging advancements in ML are pushing the boundaries
of representation learning, enabling models to encode diverse
data into semantically meaningful and continuous vectors (i.e.,
embeddings) that can be used in various tasks, including
serving as the mapping functions of world models.
1) Graph Neural Networks: In recent years, GNNs have
emerged as a transformative approach for analyzing data
structured as graphs [26]. They excel due to their invariance
to node permutations and graph sizes, allowing them to adapt
to various graph structures. By leveraging message-passing

--- PAGE 5 ---
techniques, GNNs are tasked to derive fixed-dimensional node
embeddings based not only on the features of the nodes
themselves but also on their local graph structure, capturing
information from neighboring nodes (Equation 3).
h(k+1)
v = UPDATE

h(k)
v , JOIN

{h(k)
vi | vi ∈ N (v)}

(3)
At the k-th iteration, h(k)
v denotes the embedding of node v,
and N (v) represents the set of its neighboring nodes. The
initial embedding h(0)
v is typically set to the node’s input
feature vector fv. The function JOIN aggregates information
from neighboring nodes, while UPDATE combines the aggre-
gated message with the node’s current embedding to produce
the new embedding. Both functions can be parameterized
and learned during training. Subsequently, a fixed-dimensional
graph embedding can be obtained by applying a pooling
operation [18] on the node embeddings, resulting in a compact,
fixed-dimensional representation of the entire graph, regardless
of its size (Equation 4).
hG = POOL ({hv | v ∈ V} ) (4)
If the pooling operation is order-invariant (e.g., mean), the
embedding also loses ordering features.
2) Language Models: LMs have revolutionized the field of
natural language processing by demonstrating an exceptional
ability to understand natural language. Pretrained on a vast
corpus of text from diverse contexts, these models have
learned to map text into semantically rich embeddings that
can achieve tasks with remarkable accuracy. These general
linguistic models can be reused across various applications
while maintaining a semantic understanding of language.
Vulnerabilities, in particular, are typically accompanied by
a description in free-text format, and mapping vulnerability
descriptions to semantically meaningful embeddings, which
can be used for various tasks, is where LMs are showing
promising results [31].
C. Cyber-Security Data Sources
To support the generation of diverse scenarios, this study
combines multiple sources of cybersecurity data:
• Cyber threat intelligence (CTI) tools like Shodan 3
allow gathering statistics and identifying patterns across
Internet-connected devices through custom queries, re-
vealing real-world information about services, operating
systems, and other components. As these components are
often linked to vulnerabilities, they help in understanding
their distribution and prevalence. For example, Shodan
can answer the query: What are the most common services
(hence vulnerabilities) in a specific geographic region?
• Vulnerability databases , such as the National Vulner-
ability Database (NVD) [8], offer detailed metadata on
vulnerabilities, including textual descriptions and impact
metrics. Across these metrics, the Common Vulnerability
Scoring System (CVSS) [32] vector helps assess severity
through multiple components (e.g., attack complexity).
3Shodan: https://www.shodan.io/
• The MITRE ATT&CK Framework [52] is a knowledge
base of adversarial tactics and techniques used in cyber
attacks. It defines classes of attack behaviors to which
vulnerabilities can be mapped.
III. R ELATED WORK
In this section, we explain the motivation for transitioning
from attack graphs to raw network environments for agent
training and discuss how simulation can be leveraged to model
these environments. Finally, we explore existing encoding
strategies for observation and action spaces, which play a
crucial role in shaping the agent’s learning process and the
effectiveness of its decision-making.
A. From Attack Graphs to POMDP-based Environments
One of the first automation approaches in proactive cy-
bersecurity has been the generation of attack graphs, which
identify all potential attack paths within a network for a given
goal. These tools, such as MulV AL [39], require detailed
input on the whole network representation, including the
complete list of node services, vulnerabilities, and security
policies, to produce their output. The resulting attack graph
consists of nodes representing system states, while edges
depict the possible transitions between these states based on
exploitability conditions. However, in some cases, more than
the full set of attack paths, the most critical ones for a given
threat model may be of interest. To this end, prioritization
algorithms, including RL-based approaches [23] [15], have
been using attack graphs as MDPs for attack path priori-
tization, presenting, however, several challenges [11]. New
environments like CyberBattleSim address these limitations by
directly using raw networks represented as POMDPs. This
approach allows the agent to interact directly with the real
network representation rather than an attack graph overlay,
offering distinct advantages:
1) Complete Knowledge
• Attack graphs require full knowledge of the network
topology for their generation, which is often unrealistic
for large, complex scenarios.
• In contrast, raw network POMDPs allow RL agents
to operate without complete network knowledge. The
agent starts with a partially discovered network and
progressively expands its visibility through its actions.
2) Dynamicity Issues
• Attack graphs must be regenerated whenever there are
network modifications, such as host disconnections or
service shutdowns. These changes result in a change
of the whole attack graph, where paths should be pri-
oritized, requiring its regeneration and re-execution of
path prioritization algorithms. This presents particular
challenges in highly dynamic networks, such as those
found in Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystems.
• In contrast, raw network POMDPs inherently support
dynamic environments, as changes in nodes or their

--- PAGE 6 ---
features do not alter the inherent structure of the envi-
ronment but only require modification of the number
of nodes or their feature vector.
3) Scalability Issues
• Attack graph generation tools face challenges as the
number of nodes or vulnerabilities increases, as these
additions result in a significantly larger number of
new states and transitions, leading to an exponential
increase in the size of the attack graph. This makes
them impractical for large-scale networks [40].
• In contrast, raw network POMDPs reduce scalability
issues, as adding a new node or vulnerability introduces
only a single new element in the network graph.
Building on the challenges mentioned, this work aligns with
recent studies [55] [11], that advocate for using the network
itself as a training environment and represent it as a POMDP.
This approach allows the agent to learn the prioritization
strategy by directly interacting with an evolving network
representation, eliminating the need for additional overlays and
their associated drawbacks. These network environments are
typically modeled through simulation—such as in CyberBat-
tleSim—as it enables faster action execution compared to em-
ulation or real-world setups, which is essential given the high
number of iterations required for RL algorithms to converge.
Moreover, simulation supports the generation of hundreds of
highly customizable scenarios, making it well-suited for both
large-scale training and systematic validation. However, they
often lack realism because of simplified vulnerability alloca-
tion and weak approximations of vulnerability exploitation
[58] [36], which can lead agents to learn from unrealistic
scenarios. The current version of CyberBattleSim, for example,
requires the manual definition of the network environment, the
placement of vulnerabilities, and the definition of transitions
when vulnerabilities are selected. Our study aims to address
these challenges by proposing an enhanced version of the
current tool, focused on improving these aspects.
B. Discrete RL Approaches for Attack Path Prioritization
The effectiveness of using POMDPs for attack path prioriti-
zation depends on selecting appropriate observation and action
spaces for the agent. In DRL, this choice dictates the number
and semantics of input neurons for processing observations
and output neurons for generating actions, shaping the NN
and the patterns it learns. By eliminating scenario dependence
in these spaces, NN can be applied to scenarios with structural
characteristics different from those seen during training. This
adaptability serves as an initial step toward developing an ANI
for the task. In the studies focusing on POMDPs for the task,
the agent (Equation 5) is generally designed to use a graph
representation of the network discovered at a given timestep t
and should learn to produce in output the optimal tuple (source
node, target node, vulnerability) .
πgeneral : graph encoding → (source, target, vuln)
such that max
π
Eτ ∼π [Impact(Path τ | Threat Model) ] (5)
Optimal selection here refers to maximizing the expected
impact of a path based on the desired threat model, which is
incorporated as the reward function. All existing studies used
a discrete form of this input and output. Most approaches (e.g.,
[5], [19], [60]) adopted a global view (Equation 6 or similar).
πglobal : RN ×f → RN ×N ×|V | (6)
In approaches using a global view, the observation vector
represents the discovered graph as an array that concatenates
the feature vectors of all discovered nodes, each of size f.
Because the number of discovered nodes at each timestep
in the POMDP framework can vary, the array is typically
padded to the maximum graph size N. The discrete action
space includes all possible discrete source-target-vulnerability
cases, leading to a space proportional to N and the size of
the vulnerability set V , requiring the agent to output a score
for each of these tuples. These observation and action spaces
present scalability challenges as nodes and vulnerabilities
increase and cause the agent to learn patterns that are sensitive
to the order of these elements. This approach also limits the
agent’s ability to operate on larger network scenarios or handle
vulnerabilities beyond those predefined during training.
Another approach proposed a local view [55] (Equation 7),
which restricts the ability of the agent to work on a subset of
nodes at each timestep to solve some of these issues.
πlocal : R2×f +g → R|V |+|S| (7)
This choice led to a smaller, localized observation space,
focusing only on a single source and target node, resulting
in an observation vector of size 2 × f. Additionally, it can be
optionally concatenated with a graph-invariant feature vector
g, which provides condensed information about the graph’s
structure (e.g., average importance of other nodes). The dis-
crete action space, in this case, requires producing a score for
each possible vulnerability on the current source-target pair,
and for a set of switching actions S (e.g., switch source, switch
target), forming an action space of size |V | + |S|. Although
this discrete local view approach removes the dependency on
the number of nodes N, it may result in sub-optimal choices
due to limited visibility, as another node pair may be more
critical at a given timestep, and requires one or more switching
actions to find it. Moreover, it still presents scalability issues
due to the dependence on the vulnerability set. In summary,
variations in graph structure (global view) or vulnerability sets
(global and local views) alter the spaces and require retraining
policies, a costly and time-consuming process. As a result,
most studies focus on scenario-specific agents rather than aim-
ing for an ANI. However, highly dynamic scenarios (e.g., in
IoT environments) and evolving vulnerabilities (e.g., resulting
from software updates) pose significant challenges to these
approaches. Our approach aims to lose these dependencies,
from both the graph structure and vulnerability set, creating
an agent that does not need redefinition and retraining in new
scenarios by redefining the observation and action spaces.

--- PAGE 7 ---
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
This section highlights the key contributions of this paper:
improving the realism of the simulation environment and
designing observation and action spaces that remain consistent
across various network environments and vulnerability sets.
The section subsequently explores the reward function and
the episode structure used for training.
A. Towards a More Realistic Simulation Environment
This section presents the pipeline integrated into C-
CyberBattleSim to enhance realism and ensure automation in
the simulation. Specifically, our approach proposes:
1) Automated vulnerability selection – Eliminating the
need for manually defining a set of vulnerabilities to be
incorporated in the scenarios.
2) Improved scenario generation – Implementing a more
strategic and realistic placement of vulnerabilities and
cyber-terrain features [15] within the environment.
3) Scalable outcome approximation – Replacing the need
to hard-code environment transitions for each vulnera-
bility by introducing a scalable, automated method that
dynamically determines these transitions without human
intervention.
1) Automated vulnerability selection: The first step in the
scenario generation process tackles the challenge of selecting
real-world vulnerabilities for populating synthetic graphs by
leveraging trusted data sources. To identify this information,
a CTI tool is used to collect anonymous statistics on vulnera-
bility distributions across internet-connected devices based on
a custom query (Step 1, Figure 1). For instance, when aiming
to load service-level vulnerabilities, Shodan can be queried
to retrieve the most common services and their versions
within a specific geographical area, along with their prevalence
(i.e., device counts ). Once these services and versions are
identified, databases like the NVD can be queried to retrieve
the vulnerabilities associated with each version. Together with
the list of vulnerability identifiers, their description, and CVSS
vector can be stored for later use. All this information is then
stored in the environment database in the format: (service,
version, vulnerabilities, device counts) .
2) Improved scenario generation: The second step in the
pipeline focuses on achieving a more realistic placement
of vulnerabilities within the generated graphs, based on the
custom query used to gather data and a controlled set of
parameters (list in Appendix D). Graph-based parameters
(e.g., number of nodes ) are used to create an initial empty
graph. Subsequently, service versions (and their associated
vulnerabilities) are assigned to graph nodes (Step 2, Figure
1). To ensure a more realistic assignment, we focus on both
validity and mirroring real-world conditions.
• Validity checks involve simulating specific node types
(e.g., Windows host) and restricting service assignments
to those that are compatible (e.g., Microsoft Outlook only
for Windows hosts).
Scenario
Generator
Cyber-Terrain Parameters
Firewall rules prob.
Data presence prob.
..........
Scraping
Tool
 Vulnerability
DatabaseCTI Tool
1
2
Node2
Node3
Network Environments
MySQL
CVE-2018-X....
Environment
Database
Node4
Node1
Graph Parameters
# of nodes
.....
# of services per node
Fig. 1: (1) Services and vulnerabilities are selected using a CTI
tool and a vulnerability database, and (2) a generator creates
scenarios based on these selections and input parameters.
• Mirroring real-world conditions is achieved by
weighted sampling when multiple services meet the valid-
ity constraints. The sampling priority is determined using
a weight wi = f (device count i), ensuring that services
most commonly encountered in the query results are
assigned more frequently. This aligns the graph with real-
world distributions of the query of interest. The weight
function can be adjusted (e.g., 1 + log(device count i)) to
control the level of real-world mirroring desired.
Additionally, cyber-terrain elements can be specified in the
input parameters and incorporated into the simulation, includ-
ing probabilities for firewall rules, initial service shutdowns ,
privilege escalation prerequisites for accessing nodes, and
restricted initial visibility, which necessitates discovery actions
to reveal full node details. Optionally, valuable elements such
as data presence and node importance (e.g., to indicate a
business-critical asset) are embedded. To prevent the agent
from overfitting to a single vulnerability allocation or a fixed
set of graph and cyber-terrain parameters, the scenario gen-
erator supports domain randomization [56]. This feature will
create a variety of scenarios by varying the input parameters
and the placement of vulnerabilities, all while respecting the
constraints and the weighted sampling.
3) Scalable outcome approximation: The third contribution
seeks to eliminate the need for the simulation tool developer
to manually hard-code environment transitions for each vul-
nerability in the environment. This limitation has previously
constrained the number of vulnerabilities incorporated into
each simulator. For example, the original CyberBattleSim
scenarios, commonly used in the literature, include fewer than
10 unique vulnerabilities each. With dynamic integration of
services and vulnerabilities from an external dynamic database
based on a custom query, manually encoding outcomes for

--- PAGE 8 ---
each vulnerability is impractical. Our approach leverages vul-
nerability metadata, sourced from the vulnerability database,
to infer potential outcomes in an automated way. In particular,
the set of MITRE ATT&CK Tactics associated with each
vulnerability can be used as the outcome set and inferred
from the vulnerability description using NLP tools (e.g., using
LMs fine-tuned for multi-label classification, as discussed in
[4]). Once vulnerabilities are mapped to the relevant subset of
CVE-2017-Y
RL Agent
"... allows users to
bypass credential
check ..."
CVE-2018-X
Outcome
Approximator
Environment
Database
Outcomes
allowedX
(SN:Node1, TN:Node2,
Vuln:CVE-2018-X, 
O:CredentialAccess)
Ot+1,
rt+1
Privileges Required
Attack Complexity
.....
Node2
Node3MySQL
CVE-2018-X....
Node4
Node1
DescriptionCVSS
SN:Node1,
 TN:Node2,
O:Credential
Access,
I:Impact Level
Credential Access
Ot
at
Fig. 2: The requested (source, target, vulnerability, outcome)
is validated based on the description and CVSS vector.
Tactics, the integration process is simplified, as environment
transitions are defined solely and just once for the limited set of
Tactics (14 Tactics in the MITRE ATT&CK framework). Since
vulnerabilities may have multiple potential outcomes, we also
expand the agent’s action space to allow the agent to decide the
desired outcome (how it wants to use the vulnerability) in the
action space. Previous studies have been limited by assuming
a single predefined outcome per vulnerability, which restricts
the realism of the agent in simulating attacker behavior. In
reality, some vulnerabilities can lead to multiple outcomes
(e.g., a vulnerability that enables general code execution),
and an attacker could potentially choose which outcome to
exploit. Moreover, recognizing that mapping vulnerabilities to
a general set of Tactics is overly simplistic, the environment
also incorporates the CVSS vector of the targeted vulnerability
to better approximate the exploitation process. Specifically, the
following elements of the CVSS vector are used to determine
whether the exploit is valid and to weigh the outcome:
• Attack Vector Component : Determines whether the
vulnerability can be exploited locally or remotely.
• Privileges Required : Checks the minimum privilege
level needed on the node before allowing the exploitation.
• Confidentiality Impact: Weighs the impact on confiden-
tiality for vulnerabilities involving information release.
• Attack Complexity: Weighs the success rate probabilis-
tically when the agent selects the vulnerability.
Overall, the environment extension processes the agent’s
selected action tuple at at each timestep t through a two-step
validation (Figure 2): first, it uses the vulnerability description
to confirm if the outcome selected by the agent is permissible
(e.g., Credential Access). Second, it applies the CVSS vector
to ensure additional validity checks and weighs the impact of
the outcome using the vulnerability details.
B. RL Agent Design with Continuous Spaces
To overcome challenges with discrete representations (Sec-
tion III-B), we propose an agent optimizing mappings between
continuous observation and action spaces. These spaces are
defined to be invariant to specific graph structures and vulner-
ability sets, enabling a single agent to be trained and then
evaluated across diverse scenarios. Moreover, using intelli-
gent models trained for representation learning as mapping
functions within the world model, we represent environment
elements with semantical placement in the spaces. This en-
ables the agent to learn transferable mappings that generalize
effectively across diverse scenarios.
1) Observation Space: As discussed in Section III-B, the
observation vector in this task should represent the graph
discovered by the agent at a given timestep (see Appendix A
for details on its structure and feature vectors). The observation
mapping function should encode the discovered graph into a
fixed-dimensional vector serving as the agent’s observation. To
obtain this vector, a pre-trained GNN is used to map nodes into
p-dimensional meaningful embeddings of fixed size. An order-
invariant pooling operation, POOL (e.g., mean), aggregates the
node embeddings into a meaningful graph embedding of the
same fixed dimension p. As a result, the observation vector
is invariant to both graph order and size, providing a fixed-
dimensional input for the agent (Figure 3).
Currently 
discovered 
graph
Observation
EmbeddingxG∈ Rp
GNN RL
Agent
Node Space
Dim 1
Node Space
Dim 2
G
Fig. 3: The discovered graph is processed by a GNN to
generate node embeddings, which are pooled into a fixed-
dimensional graph embedding used as the agent’s observation.
2) Action Space: As the agent is tasked with selecting a
tuple (source, target, vulnerability, outcome) at each timestep,
different models should be used to generate embeddings for
each tuple element and form the action mapping function :
• For the source and target nodes, p-dimensional embed-
dings can be generated using a GNN trained for repre-
sentation learning (e.g., the same GNN used to create the
node embeddings in Section IV-B1).
• For vulnerability choices, embeddings can be derived
from the textual descriptions using pre-trained LMs.
These models, trained to understand textual information,

--- PAGE 9 ---
can generate continuous vector embeddings of size q,
capturing the semantics of the vulnerability description.
• Outcome embeddings can be represented as one-hot
vectors of size |O|, where O denotes the outcome set.
Depending on this dimensionality is not critical since this
set remains consistent across scenarios.
RL
Agent
Action
Embedding
xA∈ Rp+p+q+|O|
(S, T, Vuln-Z, DOS)
Action Space
Dim 1
Action Space
 Dim 2
LMGNN One-hot
Encoding
S T Vuln-Z
Description DOS
T
S
Vuln-Z
∈ Rp ∈ Rp ∈ Rq ∈ R|O|
Fig. 4: Action space defined as the set of all possible concate-
nations of embeddings of discrete elements in the environment,
with the agent tasked to navigate this space.
Once embeddings for each element of the tuple have been
constructed individually (Figure 4), we need to create a unified
space for the entire action space, where points represent
tuples (source, target, vulnerability, outcome) . To construct
the action space, we concatenate all possible combinations
of source node embeddings with those of the target nodes,
followed by the embeddings of the possible vulnerabilities and
outcomes. This results in each action point being represented
as a vector of dimensionality p + p + q + |O|, with each
position semantically meaningful as the vector is derived
from the concatenation of meaningful embeddings within their
respective spaces. As depicted in Figure 4, the agent can
subsequently be trained to generate an action vector within
this space, and based on its prediction, a proximity-based
strategy can be used to select the action vector closest to the
agent’s prediction. The selected action vector is mapped to the
corresponding discrete action tuple in the real action space and
processed by the environment.
3) Advantages of Continuous Spaces: As a result of the
fixed-dimensional vectors, the agent policy is optimized using
an input and output space whose dimensions are independent
of the graph structure and vulnerability set, and using an order-
invariant pooling for the graph embeddings ensures that the
concept of graph order disappears from these spaces. As a
result, the agent can be trained or tested across scenarios with
varying graph structures and vulnerability sets (Equation 8),
as the dimensionality of the input/output spaces now depends
solely on the dimensionality of the embeddings.
πcontinuous: Rp → Rp+p+q+|O| (8)
This approach enables the agent to learn from two intelli-
gent, invariant models—one for graphs and one for text—and
navigate their knowledge spaces instead of treating discrete
choices as atomic elements. Considering the advantages of
this re-formulation:
• Continuous spaces built by intelligent models ensure gen-
eralization by mapping similar graphs, vulnerabilities,
and nodes to adjacent embeddings, enabling knowledge
transfer between scenarios with different structures but
similar semantics. Unlike discrete approaches, embed-
dings capture the internal structure of nodes and vulner-
abilities. If the agent can then be exposed to various sce-
narios (for example, with proper domain randomization),
it may incorporate generalizable knowledge.
• As different studies have demonstrated on other tasks [22]
[10], continuous action spaces often outperform discrete
ones as the number of discrete elements increases, en-
hancing scalability. In discrete approaches, the size of
observation and action vectors increases as more elements
are added. In continuous spaces, adding elements leads
to a more compressed observation vector and increases
the density of the action space, but the vector sizes are
kept constant. The scalability challenge shifts from vector
dimensionality to managing space density.
• Dynamicity is now supported by this model, as it only
triggers a change in the elements condensed into the same
observation vector and the appearance or disappearance
of points in the action space. However, the size of both
vectors and their semantics remain consistent, allowing
the same NN to process these vectors.
C. Threat Models: Reward Function
To enable the agent to learn different attacker threat models,
we define a parameterized reward function with adjustable
weights to prioritize specific behaviors. This setup allows us
to define the desired prioritization strategy for the agent when
selecting actions, using a weighted combination of bonuses
and penalties (Equation 9).
R(o, a) =
X
j
wB
j · Bj(o, a) −
X
k
wP
k · Pk(o, a) (9)
Each bonus and penalty depends on the agent’s current ob-
servation o and selected action a, as they are also influenced
by factors such as the number of assets involved and their
importance (e.g., number and importance of nodes discovered).
• Bj(o, a): Bonus terms that reward desirable behavior,
such as discovering new nodes or escalating privileges.
• Pk(o, a): Penalty terms that capture undesirable effects or
costs, such as the cost of hitting firewalls, or to include
the cost of exploiting a vulnerability (derived from the
Exploitability score in the vulnerability metadata).

--- PAGE 10 ---
• wB
j , wP
k : Weights that determine the importance of each
bonus and penalty component.
This structure enables RL agents to learn policies that align
with different attack strategies by optimizing the trade-off
between bonuses and penalties. An example of a prioritization
strategy for a control threat model would be to emphasize
large bonuses for outcomes such as credential access, while
imposing high penalties for stopping nodes with a denial of
service attack. Details on the specific bonus and penalty terms
used in the study are provided in Appendix E.
D. Episode Structure
The interaction between the agent and the environment oc-
curs in episodes. Each episode begins with the agent positioned
at a randomly selected starter node within a network scenario,
with only the starter node initially discovered. As the agent
takes actions, it uncovers additional nodes and can exploit their
vulnerabilities.
Episode example: The environment selects a scenario and a
starter node (e.g., Node1). The agent begins by exploiting local
vulnerabilities on Node1 (e.g., outcome Reconnaissance) to
discover new nodes, moves to Node2 via a remote vulnerabil-
ity (outcome Lateral Movement), escalates privileges (outcome
Privilege Escalation), collects data (outcome Collection), . . .
The agent’s policy should learn these structured behaviors by
mapping observations to actions in the redesigned observation
and action spaces. The environment processes each action,
updates the partially discovered network graph, and returns a
new observation and reward, computed according to a specific
threat model. Action validity is ensured using vulnerability
metadata, as detailed in Section IV-A3. The environment also
maintains internal lists to track the status of discovered, owned,
and disrupted nodes, updating them dynamically. Each agent
episode corresponds to an attack path, with a final score
assigned at termination to quantify its criticality, such as the
number of owned nodes in a control threat model.
V. E XPERIMENTS
The experimental section presents an empirical comparison
of the scalability of both discrete and continuous spaces
and the agents resulting from each. As continuous spaces
allow invariance across scenarios, the study then examines the
generalization and dynamicity of agents trained within them.
A. Experimental Setup
The experimental study uses C-CyberBattleSim as the envi-
ronment and the following setup choices:
• The environment database , which is used to create
synthetic network environments represented as graphs (as
outlined in Section IV-A), was constructed using Shodan
data. It identifies 172 service versions and 829 unique
vulnerabilities by querying the "50 most frequently used
services globally, and their top 5 versions." The specific
services targeted by the study are listed in Appendix C.
• The environment database is used in combination with
a set of ranges for graph-based and cyber-terrain pa-
rameters (details in Appendix D) to generate a total of
800 synthetic scenarios through domain randomization.
Each scenario results in a distinct graph structure and a
corresponding vulnerability subset.
• The outcome approximator integrated into the environ-
ment is SecureBERT [2] finetuned for multi-label classifi-
cation of MITRE ATT&CK Tactics from the vulnerability
description, with a reported test set F1 score of 76%.
The choices for RL episodes, scoring metrics, and RL libraries
are as follows:
• Considering the episode evolution, agents undergo each
training and testing episode by varying the starter node
and scenario from the corresponding set (e.g., training
set). The episode length scales with the graph size as
K × #nodes, with K defined as the episode-length
coefficient, ensuring unbiased scores across varying graph
sizes. This finite action budget encourages the agent
to prioritize the most critical vulnerability paths and
maximize impact within the given action frame.
• We use control, discovery, and disruption goals as exper-
imental threat models, conducting multiple experiments
by varying the goal in each run. The goal scores used
for the evaluation of the paths are defined here and
used throughout the experiments: percentage of nodes
controlled and with maximum privilege (ROOT privi-
lege) for control, the amount of information gathered
and exfiltrated (including node IDs and their data) for
discovery, and the percentage of nodes disrupted for
disruption. These scores are normalized relative to the
maximum achievable score starting from the episode’s
initial node—i.e., the maximum number of other nodes
it can control, discover, or disrupt.
• Across the studies, we follow best practices for RL
evaluation, including hyperparameter optimization, static
seeds, and reporting bootstrapped confidence intervals
(BCIs) with a confidence level α = 0.95 for statistical
reliability from a limited number of runs [1]. All simula-
tion and model parameters are documented in the attached
files to ensure reproducibility.
The world model for the experiments is constructed as follows:
• For generating node and graph embeddings , a GNN
was trained in an unsupervised manner on the scenario
set using a Graph Auto-Encoder (GAE) architecture [25].
The GAE was optimized using a composite reconstruc-
tion loss (Equation 10) incorporating terms for node and
edge feature vectors, the adjacency matrix, and a soft
constraint to encourage embedding diversity:
Total Loss =
X
i∈V
Lossnodei +
X
i∈V
X
j∈V
Lossedgeij
+ Lossadj(G) + DiversityEmbeddings(V)
(10)
This loss formulation ensures that the learned embeddings
capture both structural and semantic information from the

--- PAGE 11 ---
graph while maintaining diversity. The dimensionality of
the embedding vector p was set to p = 64, with both this
dimension, the GAE architecture, and its hyperparameters
tuned through hyperparameter optimization. The GAE
was trained independently of the RL agent, after which
its encoder component was frozen and reused to generate
node embeddings for the downstream task. For construct-
ing graph-level embeddings, the node embeddings were
aggregated using a combination of mean, min, and max
pooling operations. Detailed information on the GAE
training and validation process can be found in the
Appendix B.
• For the generation of vulnerability embeddings , pre-
trained LMs are used and varied between experiments.
These include four general-purpose LMs (BERT [12],
DistilBERT [46], GPT-2 [44], RoBERTa [30]) and four
cybersecurity-specific LMs (CySecBERT [6], SecBERT
[27], SecRoBERTa [27], SecureBERT [2]). All of these
models have the same output layer size, producing 768-
dimensional embeddings, fixing the vector dimensionality
to q = 768 . In each RL agent training run, a different
pre-trained and frozen LM is selected to generate embed-
dings, ensuring that we perform a comparison of agents
on multiple mapping functions for vulnerabilities.
• The nearest-neighbor selection method is used as the
proximity-based strategy , employing cosine distance
to address the curse of dimensionality in the high-
dimensional action space.
B. Scalability Study
This study assesses the ability of discrete and continuous
spaces to create agents able to learn from scenarios with
increasing sizes of nodes and vulnerabilities. Increasing the
number of nodes and vulnerabilities expands the agent’s avail-
able options while complicating the mappings between spaces.
In discrete methods, this leads to larger observation/action
vectors and necessitates an NN with larger input and output
layers. In contrast, continuous spaces maintain fixed input and
output vectors and NN layers, with the complexity manifesting
instead as a higher density of points within the spaces, as
explained in Section IV-B3.
Scenario Set: A total of 300 synthetic scenarios are gener-
ated, with three scenarios (one for each threat model)
created for each of the 100 unique combinations of node
and vulnerability counts, both ranging from 5 to 250.
Comparison: The proposed continuous spaces, compared to
the discrete global and local spaces used in the literature
until now. Instead of comparing with individual studies
using the discrete spaces, we shift the focus to comparing
with the best agent for each of these spaces. Each
approach used its best-performing DRL algorithm and
hyperparameters, ensuring that the spaces were compared
with the top model trained on them.
Study Design: Each space is used to train 300 agents over
250k iterations, each corresponding to a unique combi-
nation of graph size, vulnerability set size, and goal, with
the episode-length coefficient set to K = 30.
Evaluation Strategy: Each run trains an agent to achieve a
specific goal (using for each goal run the scores explained
in Section V). We then calculate the Area Under the
Curve (AUC) of the goal score evolution during the
training run, normalized with respect to the AUC of the
curve of an ideal agent that instantly learns the optimal
policy. This metric reflects both the speed and final value
of score improvements, offering a single measure of the
agent’s learning efficiency in each space.
53050100
150
200
250
Nodes 53050
100150200250 Vulnerabilities
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Mean Scores' AUC
Scores' AUC Surfaces
Continuous
Local
Global
Failure
Fig. 5: The normalized average AUC score for agents learning
from different spaces, with the curve depicting score progress.
Figure 5 aggregates the scores across goals per scenario
size and shows the trend of the training AUC scores when
the scenario sizes increase. The results show that discrete
agents struggle as the number of nodes and vulnerabilities
increases, since the observation and action vector sizes—and
consequently the NN input and output layers—scale with
these factors. While discrete global agents initially achieve
higher scores, they plateau sooner than discrete local agents,
and their training experiences failures due to the excessively
large resulting NN model needed to process the corresponding
vectors, which exceeds the capacity of the benchmark machine
used for training4. In contrast, the discrete local agents support
all experiments but achieve lower scores due to the limited
visibility on a subset of nodes. Previous studies using discrete
spaces in this task have, in fact, mainly focused on scenarios
with either few nodes or vulnerabilities in their experimental
section. To the best of our knowledge, the largest studies
with POMDP environments used 30 nodes and 7 vulner-
abilities for the global approach [60], and 100 nodes and
4 vulnerabilities for the local approach [55]. On the other
side, continuous agents demonstrate faster and more efficient
learning, with improved scalability and a smaller performance
4x86_64 AMD Ryzen 9 5900X 12-Core Processor, 125 GB RAM, Ubuntu
22.04.1

--- PAGE 12 ---
decline, achieving an average relative improvement of 9.3x
against discrete methods, with a 7.4x improvement compared
to the discrete local approach and an 11.2x improvement
compared to the discrete global approach.
C. Generalization Study
The proposed continuous spaces enable agents to learn
mappings on a scenario with a fixed graph structure and
vulnerability set while allowing the agent to be tested on
other scenarios with different graph or vulnerability configu-
rations. Additionally, the agent can be trained across a variety
of configurations to ensure it learns generalizable behavior.
This capability is not available in discrete approaches, as
agents are restricted to scenario-specific mappings that cannot
be transferred across scenarios. We conducted generalization
experiments to assess how well DRL algorithms train general-
izable agents in continuous spaces, particularly in transferring
knowledge from simpler to more complex scenarios (e.g., with
more firewall rules).
Scenario Set: 500 synthetic scenarios generated using domain
randomization with varying graph parameters (e.g., num-
ber of nodes in [10, 100]), cyber-terrain features (e.g.,
firewall rule probabilities), and vulnerability allocations.
These scenarios are divided into training (60%), vali-
dation (20%), and testing (20%) sets, based on an ag-
gregated complexity metric derived from the randomized
features of each scenario (details in Appendix D). In this
way, scenarios are split by increasing difficulty: training
uses simpler cases, validation includes moderate ones,
and testing involves the most complex.
Comparison: All the DRL algorithms from Stable-Baselines3
[45] supporting continuous action spaces (PPO [48],
TRPO [47], TD3 [14], TQC [28], SAC [21], Recurrent
PPO [42], A2C [33]) and a Random heuristic selecting at
each timestep random valid points from the action space.
Study Design: Each algorithm is evaluated using its optimal
hyperparameters, determined through hyperparameter op-
timization (see Appendix F for details), and is used to
train 8 agents per goal for 300k iterations with K = 10
(limited action budget per episode). A random switching
strategy is employed to ensure that the simulator switches
scenarios and starting nodes at the beginning of each
episode, throughout training, validation, and testing. This
approach guarantees that the agent encounters a wide
range of configurations during training, and is evaluated
on multiple configurations during validation and testing.
Evaluation Strategy: The best checkpoint of each training
run is determined doing early stopping on the validation
set (scenarios of moderate complexity) and it is used on
the test set (most complex scenarios) to generate 100
episodes, generating overall 24 agents × 8 algorithms ×
100 episodes = 19,200 trajectories used for comparison,
with the goal score used as trajectory metric (e.g., % of
owned nodes with ROOT privilege for control).
Figure 6 moves beyond traditional binary comparisons,
presenting a summary of the test set goal scores with a
probability rank matrix indicating the likelihood of each
algorithm in achieving a specific rank, averaging across all
goal experiments. The results indicate that TRPO outperforms
all other algorithms, while TD3 decisively ranks the lowest.
It is noteworthy that several of the other algorithms perform
at a level comparable to, or marginally better than the ran-
dom valid heuristic, showcasing that not all algorithms are
able to learn meaningful policies in continuous spaces. The
TRPO algorithm, recognized as the top performer, is used to
analyze scores by re-testing its agents across the different set
splits, considering that they were only exposed to the training
set consisting of simpler scenarios. Table I summarizes the
distributional shifts in key scenario features observed in the
validation and test sets relative to the training set.
TABLE I: Relative increase or decrease of selected scenario
features in validation and test sets compared to training.
Feature Validation Test
Avg. number of nodes per scenario 1.21× 1.29×
Unique service combinations across hosts 1.04× 1.17×
Avg. firewall rule probability 1.11× 1.18×
Probability of initial user-level access on
first node access
1.09× 1.16×
Probability of partial visibility on first node
access
1.15× 1.23×
Probability of data presence on a node 0.87× 0.78×
Probability of service startup shutdown 1.29× 1.42×
Avg. % nodes discoverable across all starter
nodes
0.92× 0.88×
Avg. % nodes reachable via lateral move-
ment across all starter nodes
0.88× 0.82×
Avg. % nodes vulnerable to disruption
across all starter nodes
0.86× 0.80×
The results in Figure 7 show that scenario complexity im-
pacts the control and disruption goals, while discovery main-
tains more consistent performance across different scenario
sets. To summarize generalization performance, we compute
the mean ratio between the test set scores (representing the
most complex scenarios) and the training set scores (corre-
sponding to the simplest scenarios and those encountered dur-
ing training). On average, TRPO agents achieve an 89% test-
to-training score ratio, demonstrating effective generalization
to more complex scenarios.
D. Dynamicity Study
TRPO has been used to analyze generalization under dy-
namic conditions, a critical requirement for deployment in
online environments [29]. To this aim, we introduce a ran-
dom events probabilistic defender into the test set scenarios,
maintaining the same experimental study of Section V-C. The
defender agent intervenes on each node with probability pn
after each attacker action, and we visualize the resulting effect
on the episode scores for the attacker agent. When intervening,
the defender randomly selects one of four actions with equal
probability, applied to a randomly chosen service or firewall
rule on the node:
• Starting a service (potentially beneficial)
• Stopping a service (potentially detrimental)

--- PAGE 13 ---
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Position
Probability Distribution0.14 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.16 0.12
0.14
0.18 0.17 0.15 0.12 0.11
0.47
0.16 0.12
0.13 0.14 0.15 0.16 0.17
0.14
0.12 0.12 0.11 0.11 0.14 0.25
0.13 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.13
0.76
0.14 0.15 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.14
Mean Ranking across Experiments
TRPO
PPO
RPPO
SAC
TD3
TQC
A2C
Random
Fig. 6: Rank probability matrix highlighting the likelihood of
each DRL algorithm producing agents that achieve a certain
rank across all goals. Bars represent non-negligible probabilities
greater than 10%.
Goal
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6Mean Score & BCI
Control Discovery Disruption
TRPO Scores per Goal and Split
Training
Validation
T est
Fig. 7: TRPO agent scores for each goal and scenario set.
1% 10% 25% 50%
Node-Intervention Probability (pn)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Mean Score & BCI
TRPO Goal Scores vs Defender
Control (slope: 0.09)
Discovery (slope: -0.03)
Disruption (slope: -0.04)
Fig. 8: TRPO agent test set scores vs defender probability.
• Allowing a firewall rule (potentially beneficial)
• Blocking a firewall rule (potentially detrimental)
These actions alter the network services and firewalls, making
certain vulnerabilities exploitable or not. Consequently, the
observation vector changes (as node embeddings vary), and
the set of valid points in the action space shifts accordingly.
Whether the defender’s action benefits or harms the attacker
depends on which action is randomly selected. The results
(Figure 8) indicate that agents trained for discovery and
disruption goals experience a slight performance decline (i.e.,
a reduction in the average amount of information discovered
and nodes disrupted), but still generalize effectively, even
with high intervention probabilities (up to 50% of nodes that
undergo at least a change after each attacker agent action). In
contrast, agents trained for the control goal show improved
scores by effectively leveraging beneficial changes to gain
control over more nodes, while also exhibiting resilience to
detrimental changes.
VI. R EAL -WORLD APPLICABILITY
The simulation environment released with this paper not
only enables the generation of synthetic scenarios but also
allows the creation of scenarios by importing vulnerability
scans and representing them as virtual replicas. The deploy-
ment pipeline for agents in these replicas follows these steps:
1) A virtual replica, with the same structure, overlays the
application scenario, optionally updated with periodic
vulnerability scan snapshots.
2) Missing features and information (e.g., data presence) are
either provided by the administrator or probabilistically
varied to represent various scenarios.
3) Continuous spaces are constructed using a set of mapping
functions (GNN and LM of choice) to generate embed-
dings based on the graph and vulnerability descriptions.
4) Agents can either be retrained on the virtual replicas and
then deployed in them for the prediction of paths, or
trained on synthetic scenarios and then only deployed
to the virtual replicas. The deployment involves running
the agents for a configurable number of episodes N, with
a budget of actions (episode-length coefficient K) from
selected starter nodes, producing critical paths.
5) The generated critical paths—logs detailing sequences of
source, target, vulnerability, and outcome—can help ad-
ministrators allocate defenses based on research questions
(e.g., identifying frequently targeted nodes), with their
efficacy measured by the associated episode scores.
6) (Optional) The pipeline can be re-iterated to evaluate
defense strategies by re-deploying the agents after the
modifications and tracking any score deterioration.
We validate this pipeline by using virtual replicas derived
from real-world and emulated network scans of organizational
scenarios. Additionally, we use this experiment to evaluate the
research question: Can agents trained exclusively on synthetic
scenarios generalize to realistic scenarios, and is their perfor-
mance comparable to that of agents trained directly in those
realistic environments?
Scenario Set: Two scenarios of 100 nodes: one derived
from a scan of an emulated network (350 vulnerabilities,
adapted from [40]) and one from a real-world network
(784 vulnerabilities), with distinct vulnerability sets and
distributions (as represented in Figure 9).
Comparison: 1) Continuous TRPO agents retrained specifi-

--- PAGE 14 ---
cally on each application scenario for 300k iterations and
then re-tested in the corresponding scenario seen during
training; 2) Continuous TRPO agents trained solely on
synthetic scenarios using domain randomization (as done
in Section V-C) and then tested zero-shot on the unseen
application scenarios; 3) A heuristic strategy prioritizing
vulnerabilities with the highest impact scores (maximize
damages); and 4) a heuristic strategy prioritizing ex-
ploitability scores (maximize ease of exploitation).
Study Design: Each trained agent and heuristic is used to
generate N = 240 trajectories (episodes) for each of
the application scenarios using K = 30 (allow longer
episodes and monitor near-to-maximum impact).
Evaluation Strategy: Average goal scores from testing
episodes are used to assess the criticality of the attack
paths and determine whether an agent or heuristic is more
effective for generating these paths for a given goal.
0 100
Node ID
0
100
200# of CVEs
Real Distribution
0 100
Node ID
0
200# of CVEs
Emulated Distribution
Goal
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75Mean Score & BCI
Control DiscoveryDisruption
Real Scores
TRPO Agent - Retrained
TRPO Agent - Synthetic Only
Heuristic - Impact Score
Heuristic - Exploitability Score
Goal
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75Mean Score & BCI
Control DiscoveryDisruption
Emulated Scores
Fig. 9: TRPO agent, retrained or not, tested against heuristics
on both emulated and real-world replica environments.
1) Agents vs Heuristics: Results (Figure 9) show that both
agents (retrained and trained solely on synthetic scenarios)
outperform heuristics on both the real-world and emulated
scans for the control and discovery goals. Heuristics and agents
show no clear winner for the disruption goal, underscoring
the challenge for agents of learning disruption strategies. This
is further complicated by having heuristics that are more
effective in this case, as vulnerabilities with high exploitability
and impact scores typically result in disruption as a potential
outcome.
2) Retrained vs. Synthetic-Only Agents: As expected,
agents retrained on the specific application scenarios out-
perform those trained solely on synthetic data. However,
computing the average ratio of scores between synthetic-only
and retrained agents shows that synthetic-only agents achieve
75% of the scores of retrained agents (ratio of scores)—84% in
the emulated scenario and 65% in the real-world scenario. This
validates the generalization of continuous agents, showing that
those trained on synthetic scenarios can achieve competitive
results, with retrained agents as the upper bound. Future
research may bridge the sim-to-real gap when synthetic-trained
agents match the performance of those trained on specific
application scenarios. While retraining on application-specific
data ensures high-performance agents, it may not be feasible
in privacy-sensitive contexts where vulnerability scans are
restricted. In such cases, agents trained on synthetic data can,
in fact, provide a viable alternative.
3) Execution Time: The total execution time of the agent on
the replica environments depends on several factors, including
the episode-length coefficient K and the number of episodes
N. For instance, on a benchmark personal computer 5, each
iteration (action) of the agent on the replica of the real-
world network with 100 nodes and 784 vulnerabilities takes
approximately 0.0215 ± 0.0016 seconds. Using K = 10 and
N = 10 episodes, the agent would take approximately 3
minutes and 35 seconds on average for the entire run.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK
In this study, we present two main contributions: (1) an auto-
mated and more realistic simulation environment that leverages
CTI tools and vulnerability databases for scenario genera-
tion, along with an automated strategy for approximating
vulnerability exploitation, and (2) the proposal of continuous,
generalizable observation and action spaces, which decouple
the agent’s input and output from specific network structures
and vulnerability sets, enabling the agent to avoid re-training
when deployed on other scenarios, scale to unprecedented
sizes, and generalize effectively across diverse, complex, and
realistic scenarios. The C-CyberBattleSim environment, pro-
vided alongside this paper, enables the re-scraping of data to
expand the environment database, generates new scenarios,
and supports the training and testing of both discrete and
continuous agents. The scenarios used in the experimental sec-
tion, along with the hyperparameters employed, are attached to
ensure reproducibility. Future work will focus on: transitioning
from MITRE ATT&CK Tactics to Techniques for greater
detail in vulnerability outcome approximation, expanding the
focus to vulnerabilities beyond the service level, and further
broadening the heuristic reward function.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially supported by the French
National Research Agency under the France 2030 label (Su-
perviz ANR-22-PECY-0008). The views reflected herein do
not necessarily reflect the opinion of the French government.
5x86_64 AMD Ryzen 7 PRO 7840U with Radeon 780M Graphics, 30 GB
RAM, Ubuntu 22.04.1

--- PAGE 15 ---
REFERENCES
[1] Agarwal, R., Schwarzer, M., Castro, P.S., Courville, A.C., Belle-
mare, M.: Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical
precipice. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2021).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2108.13264
[2] Aghaei, E., Niu, X., Shadid, W., Al-Shaer, E.: Securebert: A domain-
specific language model for cybersecurity. In: Security and Privacy
in Communication Networks (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
25538-0_3
[3] Akiba, T., Sano, S., Yanase, T., Ohta, T., Koyama, M.: Optuna: A next-
generation hyperparameter optimization framework (2019)
[4] Ampel, B., Samtani, S., Ullman, S., Chen, H.: Linking common vulner-
abilities and exposures to the mitre att&ck framework: A self-distillation
approach (2021). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2108.01696
[5] Applebaum, A., Dennler, C., Dwyer, P., Moskowitz, M., Nguyen, H.,
Nichols, N., Park, N., Rachwalski, P., Rau, F., Webster, A., Wolk,
M.: Bridging automated to autonomous cyber defense: Foundational
analysis of tabular q-learning. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM
Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security. AISec’22 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3560830.3563732
[6] Bayer, M., Kuehn, P., Shanehsaz, R., Reuter, C.: Cysecbert: A domain-
adapted language model for the cybersecurity domain. ACM Trans. Priv.
Secur. (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.02974
[7] Bergstra, J., Bardenet, R., Bengio, Y ., Kégl, B.: Algorithms for hyper-
parameter optimization. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems. vol. 24 (2011)
[8] Booth, H., Rike, D., Witte, G.A.: The national vulnerability database
(nvd): Overview (2013)
[9] Brown, R., Lee, R.M.: The evolution of cyber threat intelligence (cti):
2019 sans cti survey. Tech. rep., SANS Institute (February 2019)
[10] Chandak, Y ., Theocharous, G., Kostas, J., Jordan, S., Thomas, P.S.:
Learning action representations for reinforcement learning (2019), https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1902.00183
[11] Cody, T.: A layered reference model for penetration testing
with reinforcement learning and attack graphs. In: 2022 IEEE
29th Annual Software Technology Conference (STC) (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1109/STC55697.2022.00015
[12] Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding (2019)
[13] Dulac-Arnold, G., Evans, R., van Hasselt, H., Sunehag, P., Lilli-
crap, T., Hunt, J., Mann, T., Weber, T., Degris, T., Coppin, B.:
Deep reinforcement learning in large discrete action spaces (2016).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1512.07679
[14] Fujimoto, S., van Hoof, H., Meger, D.: Addressing
function approximation error in actor-critic methods (2018).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1802.09477
[15] Gangupantulu, R., Cody, T., Park, P., Rahman, A.,
Eisenbeiser, L., Radke, D., Clark, R.: Using cyber terrain
in reinforcement learning for penetration testing (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1109/COINS54846.2022.9855011
[16] Garg, U., Sikka, G., Awasthi, L.K.: Empirical analysis of attack graphs
for mitigating critical paths and vulnerabilities. Computers & Security
77, 349–359 (2018)
[17] Gelada, C., Kumar, S., Buckman, J., Nachum, O., Bellemare, M.G.:
Deepmdp: Learning continuous latent space models for representation
learning (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02736
[18] Grattarola, D., Zambon, D., Bianchi, F.M., Alippi, C.: Under-
standing pooling in graph neural networks. IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks and Learning Systems 35(2), 2708–2718 (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3190922
[19] Guo, X., Ren, J., Zheng, J., Liao, J., Sun, C., Zhu, H., Song, T., Wang,
S., Wang, W.: Automated penetration testing with fine-grained control
through deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Communications and
Information Networks . https://doi.org/10.23919/JCIN.2023.10272349
[20] Ha, D., Schmidhuber, J.: World models (2018).
https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.1207631, https://zenodo.org/record/
1207631
[21] Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., Levine, S.: Soft actor-critic: Off-
policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor (2018). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1801.01290
[22] van Hasselt, H., Wiering, M.A.: Using continuous action spaces to solve
discrete problems. In: 2009 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (2009). https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2009.5178745
[23] Hu, Z., Beuran, R., Tan, Y .: Automated penetration testing us-
ing deep reinforcement learning. In: 2020 IEEE European Sym-
posium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW) (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1109/EuroSPW51379.2020.00010
[24] Husák, M., Komárková, J., Bou-Harb, E., ˇCeleda, P.: Survey
of attack projection, prediction, and forecasting in cyber
security. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2018.2871866
[25] Kipf, T.N., Welling, M.: Variational graph auto-encoders (2016), https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1611.07308
[26] Kipf, T.N., Welling, M.: Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks (2017), https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907
[27] Kun: Secbert: A pretrained language model for cyber security text (2024)
[28] Kuznetsov, A., Shvechikov, P., Grishin, A., Vetrov, D.: Controlling
overestimation bias with truncated mixture of continuous distributional
quantile critics (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2005.04269
[29] Li, Q., Wang, R., Li, D., Shi, F., Zhang, M., Chattopadhyay, A., Shen,
Y ., Li, Y .: Dynpen: Automated penetration testing in dynamic network
scenarios using deep reinforcement learning. Trans. Info. For. Sec.
(2024). https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2024.3461950
[30] Liu, Y ., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis,
M., Zettlemoyer, L., Stoyanov, V .: Roberta: A robustly optimized bert
pretraining approach (2019). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1907.11692
[31] Liu, Z., Shi, J., Buford, J.F.: Cyberbench: A multi-task benchmark for
evaluating large language models in cybersecurity (2024)
[32] Mell, P., Scarfone, K., Romanosky, S.: Common vulnerability
scoring system. IEEE Security Privacy 4(6), 85–89 (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2006.145
[33] Mnih, V ., Badia, A.P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T.P., Harley, T.,
Silver, D., Kavukcuoglu, K.: Asynchronous methods for deep reinforce-
ment learning (2016). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1602.01783
[34] Monahan, G.E.: State of the art—a survey of partially observable markov
decision processes: Theory, models, and algorithms. Management Sci-
ence (1982). https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.28.1.1
[35] Muratore, F., Gienger, M., Peters, J.: Assessing transferability from
simulation to reality for reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 43(4), 1172–1183 (Apr 2021).
https://doi.org/10.1109/tpami.2019.2952353
[36] Nguyen, T., Chen, Z., Hasegawa, K., Fukushima, K., Beu-
ran, R.: Pengym: Pentesting training framework for reinforce-
ment learning agents. In: Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.104140
[37] Olswang, A., Gonda, T., Puzis, R., Shani, G., Shapira, B.,
Tractinsky, N.: Prioritizing vulnerability patches in large net-
works. Expert Systems with Applications 193, 116467 (2022).
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.116467
[38] van den Oord, A., Vinyals, O., Kavukcuoglu, K.: Neural discrete
representation learning (2018), https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.00937
[39] Ou, X., Govindavajhala, S., Appel, A.W.: MulV AL: A logic-based
network security analyzer. In: 14th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 05) (2005)
[40] Palma, A., Angelini, M.: It is time to steer: A scalable framework
for analysis-driven attack graph generation. In: Computer Security –
ESORICS 2024 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-70903-6_12
[41] Pennachin, C., Goertzel, B.: Contemporary approaches to artificial gen-
eral intelligence. In: Artificial general intelligence, pp. 1–30. Springer
(2007)
[42] Pleines, M., Pallasch, M., Zimmer, F., Preuss, M.: Generalization,
mayhems and limits in recurrent proximal policy optimization (2022).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.11104
[43] Puterman, M.L.: Markov decision processes: Discrete stochastic dy-
namic programming (1994)
[44] Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever, I.:
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners (2019)
[45] Raffin, A., Hill, A., Gleave, A., Kanervisto, A., Ernestus, M., Dormann,
N.: Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations.
Journal of Machine Learning Research (2021)
[46] Sanh, V ., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., Wolf, T.: Distilbert, a dis-
tilled version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter (2020).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1910.01108
[47] Schulman, J., Levine, S., Moritz, P., Jordan, M.I.,
Abbeel, P.: Trust region policy optimization (2017).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1502.05477

--- PAGE 16 ---
[48] Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A.,
Klimov, O.: Proximal policy optimization algorithms (2017).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1707.06347
[49] Shah, S., Mehtre, B.: An overview of vulnerability assessment and pen-
etration testing techniques. Journal of Computer Virology and Hacking
Techniques (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11416-014-0231-x
[50] Sheyner, O., Haines, J., Jha, S., Lippmann, R., Wing, J.: Au-
tomated generation and analysis of attack graphs. In: Proceed-
ings 2002 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1109/SECPRI.2002.1004377
[51] Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, M., Guez,
A., Lanctot, M., Sifre, L., Kumaran, D., Graepel, T., et al.: A general
reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go
through self-play. Science 362(6419), 1140–1144 (2018)
[52] Strom, B.E., Applebaum, A., Miller, D.P., Nickels, K.C., Pennington,
A.G., Thomas, C.B.: Mitre att&ck: Design and philosophy. In: Technical
report. The MITRE Corporation (2018)
[53] Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction
(2018)
[54] Team., M.D.R.: Cyberbattlesim (2021), created by Seifert C., Betser M.,
Blum W., Bono J., Farris K., Goren E., Grana J., Holsheimer K., Marken
B., Neil J., Nichols N., Parikh J., Wei H.
[55] Terranova, F., Lahmadi, A., Chrisment, I.: Leveraging deep reinforce-
ment learning for cyber-attack paths prediction: Formulation, gener-
alization, and evaluation. In: Proceedings of the 27th International
Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses (RAID
2024) (2024). https://doi.org/10.1145/3678890.3678902
[56] Tobin, J., Fong, R., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Zaremba, W., Abbeel,
P.: Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from
simulation to the real world. In: 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Con-
ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). pp. 23–30 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2017.8202133
[57] Wang, S.C.: Artificial Neural Network, pp. 81–100. Springer US,
Boston, MA (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-0377-4_5
[58] Wang, Y ., Liu, S., Wang, W., Zhou, C., Zhang, C., Jin, J., Zhu, C.: A
unified modeling framework for automated penetration testing (2025),
https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.11588
[59] Wu, Z., Pan, S., Chen, F., Long, G., Zhang, C., Yu, P.S.:
A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2978386
[60] Yao, Q., Wang, Y ., Xiong, X., Li, Y .: Intelligent penetra-
tion testing in dynamic defense environment. In: Proceedings
of the 2022 International Conference on Cyber Security (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3584714.3584716
[61] Zhao, W.X., Zhou, K., Li, J., Tang, T., Wang, X., Hou, Y ., Min,
Y ., Zhang, B., Zhang, J., Dong, Z., Du, Y ., Yang, C., Chen, Y .,
Chen, Z., Jiang, J., Ren, R., Li, Y ., Tang, X., Liu, Z., Liu, P.,
Nie, J.Y ., Wen, J.R.: A survey of large language models (2023).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.18223
[62] Zhou, S., Liu, J., Lu, Y ., Yang, J., Hou, D., Zhang, Y ., Hu, S.:
April: Towards scalable and transferable autonomous penetration test-
ing in large action space via action embedding. IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing 22(3), 2443–2459 (2025).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2024.3518500
APPENDIX A
GRAPH REPRESENTATION
The graph representation used in this study to model the
environment at timestep t (Figure 10) consists of graph nodes
that represent network hosts. Each node’s feature vector com-
bines several attributes:
• firewall_config_array: An array detailing the node’s
firewall configuration. Each element corresponds to a port
and indicates whether an outgoing or incoming BLOCK
rule is present.
• listening_services_running_array: An array with binary
values indicating whether each service on the node is
currently running.
DescriptionVuln1
LM
Node PropertiesFirewall ConfigurationValue....
Aggregation
DescriptionVulns Exploited
LM
Currently discovered graph
DescriptionVuln2
.....
Fig. 10: Graph representation of the environment, illustrating
node and edge feature vectors.
• visible: A binary value representing the level of visibility
of the node—whether it is fully visible or partially visible.
• persistence: A binary value indicating whether the agent
has achieved persistence on the node.
• has_data: A flag indicating whether data is present on
the node, treated as a binary value.
• data_collected: A binary value indicating whether data
has been collected from the node.
• data_exfiltrated: A binary value indicating if data has
been exfiltrated from the node.
• defense_evasion: A binary value reflecting whether the
agent has evaded the defense systems on the node (fire-
wall and potential defenders).
• privilege_level: An integer denoting the agent’s privilege
level on the node ( No Access, Basic User, ROOT).
• status: An integer value representing the current status
of the node, such as running, re-imaging, or stopping.
• value: Importance value assigned to the node.
• sla_weight: The weight associated with the node’s ser-
vice level agreement, reflecting its criticality.
• vulnerabilities_embedding: A vector with the pooled
embeddings of vulnerabilities, derived with LMs.
• listening_services_embeddings: A vector with the
pooled embeddings of service names, derived with LMs.
Edges of the graph represent the vulnerabilities exploited
between nodes up to the current timestep, with their feature
vectors aggregating the embeddings of the exploited vulner-
abilities. This structure enables the agent to encapsulate the
current state of discovery, the historical context of vulnerabil-
ities exploited up to the current timestep, and the semantics
of vulnerabilities within the network.
APPENDIX B
GRAPH AUTO -E NCODER
The GAE employed in this study consists of a GNN-based
Encoder followed by a simple feed-forward NN Decoder.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Feature Description Range used Sampling Strategy Complexity
Categoriza-
tion
Number of nodes Number of graph nodes in the scenario [10, 100] Random Ascending
Number of services per node Number of services sampled per node [1, 3] Random Ascending
Homogeneity value Real value determining the amount of homogeneity
present in the scenario in service assignment
[0.05, 0.33] Random Descending
Percentage of nodes per type Proportion of nodes belonging to each category (e.g.,
Windows) in the generated scenario
[0.05, 0.95] Random N/A
Firewall incoming rule proba-
bility
Probability that for every service of every node, there
is a blocking rule incoming
[0, 0.33] Random Ascending
Firewall outgoing rule proba-
bility
Probability that for every service of every node, there
is a blocking rule outgoing
[0, 0.33] Random Ascending
Probability of neighbor infor-
mation release
Probability applied to each vulnerability that reveals
neighboring node IDs, determining how many nodes
will be discovered exploiting this vulnerability
[0.2, 0.8] Determined based on
the Confidentiality Im-
pact of the vulnerability
Descending
Probability of data presence Probability that each node has data to collect (ap-
plied only if the node has at least one vulnerability
allowing "Collection" outcome)
[0.2, 0.8] Random Descending
Probability of partial visibility
on nodes
Probability that each node will be partially visible
once owned (applied only if the node has at least
one vulnerability allowing "Discovery" outcome)
[0.2, 0.8] Random Ascending
Probability of need for escala-
tion
Probability that the node, when owned, starts with a
"basic user" level and not "root" level (applied only
if the node has at least one vulnerability allowing
"Privilege Escalation" outcome)
[0.2, 0.8] Random Ascending
Probability of service shut-
down
Probability that every service of every node will start
with a shutdown status
[0, 0.2] Random Ascending
Success rate Probability representing the success rate for every
vulnerability, used to simulate failure of vulnerability
exploitation
[0.6, 1] Determined based on
the Attack Complexity
of the vulnerability
Descending
Node value Value assigned to each node, representing its impor-
tance in the scenario
[1, 100] Random N/A
TABLE II: Description of scenario features, including information about which range has been sampled during scenario
generation, with which sampling strategy, and the resulting complexity categorization.
The overall goal is to compress and decompress node fea-
ture vectors along with the surrounding graph structure into
meaningful p-dimensional continuous embeddings. The model
training uses unsupervised learning with the reconstruction
loss described in Equation 10. After training, the Decoder
is discarded, leaving the Encoder to generate meaningful
node embeddings. The GAE was trained on 500 scenario
graphs (the same set of the Generalization Study in Section
V-C), following hyperparameter optimization, and using early
stopping on a validation set to select the most generalizable
checkpoint (Figure 11).
2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Iteration
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18Mean Loss & Std
Train/Validation GAE Loss
Train Loss
Validation Loss
Fig. 11: GAE reconstruction training and validation loss.
APPENDIX C
VULNERABILITIES DATA
In the experimental section (Section V), scenarios are con-
structed using the 50 most vulnerable services identified by
Shodan. For each service, up to five of the most vulnerable
versions were selected. However, due to data availability
constraints, some services had fewer than five versions listed,
resulting in a total of 172 service versions. Vulnerabilities
associated with these versions were retrieved from the NVD
using their Common Platform Enumeration identifiers. This
process resulted in 829 unique vulnerabilities, each of which
may affect one or more service versions. During the scenario
generation process, these services are assigned to nodes rep-
resenting different device types (e.g., IoT nodes), ensuring
that each node type is assigned only services relevant to its
category. The following are the services identified from the
Shodan query (at the timestep of 18 November 2024) and the
node types simulated:
Services: Nginx, Apache httpd, Squid http proxy, Microsoft
IIS httpd, Exim smtpd, Jetty, MongoDB, Remote Desktop
Protocol, Jenkins, Wildix Collaboration, Apache Tom-
cat, NET-DK, Metabase, Outlook Web App, Tengine,
VMware ESXi, OpenSSH, OpenResty, MySQL, Con-
trol Web Panel, Apache Tomcat/Coyote JSP engine,
Nextcloud, Elastic, lighttpd, GoAhead Embedded Web
Server, Hikvision IP Camera, RabbitMQ, Boa Web

--- PAGE 18 ---
Learning
Rate
Batch
Size
γ N
Steps
Ent
Coef
Value
Coef
Max
Grad
Norm
Target
KL
Tau Buffer
Size
Target
En-
tropy
Target
Pol-
icy
Noise
GA(λ) Num
Lay-
ers
NN
Chan-
nels
Out
Chan-
nels
Activation
PPO 0.00001,
0.0001,
0.001
32,
64,
128
0.9,
0.95,
0.99
512,
1024,
2048
0.01,
0.1,
0.2
0.1,
0.3,
0.5
TRPO 0.0001,
0.001,
0.01
64,
128,
256
0.9,
0.95,
0.99
1024,
2048,
4096
0.01,
0.05,
0.1
0.9,
0.95,
0.99
A2C 0.0001,
0.001,
0.01
0.9,
0.95,
0.99
5,
10,
20
0.01,
0.1,
0.2
0.5,
1.0,
1.5
0.3,
0.5,
0.7
SAC 0.00001,
0.0001,
0.001
32,
64,
128
0.9,
0.95,
0.99
0.0005,
0.001,
0.005
100000,
500000,
1000000
-2,
-1.5,
-1.0
TD3 0.0001,
0.001,
0.01
64,
128,
256
0.9,
0.95,
0.99
0.001,
0.005,
0.01
100000,
500000,
1000000
0.1,
0.2,
0.3
TQC 0.0001,
0.001,
0.01
64,
128,
256
0.9,
0.95,
0.99
0.01,
0.1,
0.2
0.001,
0.005,
0.01
100000,
500000,
1000000
GAE 0.000001,
0.00001,
0.00005,
0.0001,
0.001,
0.01
16,
32,
64,
128
2, 3,
4
16,
32,
64
16,
32,
64
LeakyReLU,
ReLU,
null
TABLE III: Hyperparameters and ranges explored for each of the different algorithms undergoing the optimization process.
Optimal hyperparameters found are highlighted in bold.
Server, Grafana, micro_httpd, Boa HTTPd, DrayTek
Vigor Series (2925, 2862, 2860, 2762, 2912, 2926, 2133,
2927, 2865), ZTE H268A, ZTE ZXHN H168N, Cisco
Systems, ZTE F680, Bbox.
Types: Windows Host, Unix Host, IoT node, Industrial Con-
trol System (ICS) node, Router.
APPENDIX D
GRAPH AND CYBER -T ERRAIN PARAMETERS
Several factors have been incorporated to enhance the
realism of the simulated scenarios, categorized into graph
parameters and cyber-terrain parameters. Table II provides a
detailed description of these features, which collectively define
a scenario along with the corresponding service/vulnerability
allocations. For each generated scenario, the values of these
features are sampled from the specified ranges, as indicated
in the table. The sampling process depends on the CVSS
vector of specific vulnerabilities (if the feature is tied to a
particular vulnerability) or random sampling (if the feature is
tied to the whole scenario), as detailed in the proper column of
the table. The complexity categorization column outlines how
each feature affects the complexity score, determining whether
the scenario’s complexity increases (ascending feature) or
decreases (descending feature) with an increase in the value of
this feature. The complexity score used in this study is defined
in Equation 11.
Complexity Score =
X
i∈Ascending
wi · Norm[0,1](fi)
−
X
j∈Descending
wj · (1 − Norm[0,1](fj))
(11)
Each feature range has been normalized using min-max scaling
to the range [0, 1] in order to ensure consistent scaling across
all features. The sums of components determining the score
can be adjusted with appropriate weights to emphasize certain
factors over others in determining the overall complexity. In
our experiments, all these weights were set to 1, giving equal
importance to each feature.
APPENDIX E
REWARD FUNCTION
The components of the reward function are organized
into bonuses and penalties. These terms have been carefully
selected and adjusted based on the specific goals ( control,
discovery, disruption) and their semantics. The specific values
assigned for each goal are detailed in the configuration files
provided with the paper.
Reward Bonuses: Node Owned, Node Disrupted, Node Dis-
covered, Data Collected, Privilege Escalation, Acquired
Visibility, Data Exfiltrated, Defense Evaded, Episode
Won
Reward Penalties: Vulnerability Cost, No Enough Privi-
leges, Success Rate Failed, No Data to Collect, No Data
to Discover, No Data to Exfiltrate, Already Persistent,
Machine Already Stopped, Node Already Owned, Node
Already Visible, Already Defense Evasion, Scanning
Unopen Port, Privilege Escalation in Node Not Owned,
Privilege Escalation to Level Already Had, Blocked by
Local/Remote Firewall, Episode Lost
APPENDIX F
HYPERPARAMETER OPTIMIZATION
For the hyperparameter optimization process, experiments
utilized the Optuna library [3], specifically employing the

--- PAGE 19 ---
Tree-Structured Parzen Estimator [7] optimization algorithm.
A total of 25 trials were conducted for each algorithm being
optimized (DRL algorithm and GAE). Table III lists the ranges
explored for each algorithm. The objective used for the GAE
is the minimization of the reconstruction loss on the validation
set. For RL algorithms, the objective used is the maximization
of the AUC of the validation goal scores (averaging across the
three experimental goals). The following hyperparameters are
instead kept constant throughout the study for the algorithms:
• NN Layer Sizes: For all DRL algorithms, the sizes of the
NN layers were set to [256, 128, 64]. For RecurrentPPO,
an LSTM layer was added of size [32].
• Activation Function: LeakyReLU was used as the acti-
vation function for the NN.
• Optimizer: The Adam optimizer was used for both DRL
algorithms and GAE. A value of 1 × 10−7 was set for
the epsilon parameter. The weight decay was fixed at 1 ×
10−4.
• GAE Architecture: The GAE consisted of one NNConv
layer as the first layer. This ensures that edge feature
vectors are used in the computation of the embeddings.
Subsequent layers are GCNConv layers.
All other hyperparameters, not explicitly mentioned, were
left at their default values as defined by the respective libraries.