
--- PAGE 1 ---
Structural Generalization in
Autonomous Cyber Incident Response with
Message-Passing Neural Networks and
Reinforcement Learning
1st Jakob Nyberg
Division of Network and Systems Engineering
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
jaknyb (at) kth.se
2nd Pontus Johnson
Division of Network and Systems Engineering
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
pontusj (at) kth.se
Abstract—We believe that agents for automated incident
response based on machine learning need to handle changes
in network structure. Computer networks are dynamic, and can
naturally change in structure over time. Retraining agents for
small network changes costs time and energy. We attempt to
address this issue with an existing method of relational agent
learning, where the relations between objects are assumed to
remain consistent across problem instances. The state of the
computer network is represented as a relational graph and
encoded through a message passing neural network. The message
passing neural network and an agent policy using the encoding are
optimized end-to-end using reinforcement learning. We evaluate
the approach on the second instance of the Cyber Autonomy Gym
for Experimentation (CAGE 2), a cyber incident simulator that
simulates attacks on an enterprise network. We create variants of
the original network with different numbers of hosts and agents
are tested without additional training on them. Our results show
that agents using relational information are able to find solutions
despite changes to the network, and can perform optimally in some
instances. Agents using the default vector state representation
perform better, but need to be specially trained on each network
variant, demonstrating a trade-off between specialization and
generalization.
Index Terms —cyber security, reinforcement learning, graph
learning, relational learning, generalization
I. I NTRODUCTION
We focus on the automation of cyber security incident
response, where we imagine an automated agent that takes
actions and modifies the computer network to address ongoing
incidents. An example scenario is ransomware spreading in a
corporate network, where action is required to prevent further
damage. Following previous work in this domain [1]–[6], we
frame incident response as a stochastic decision problem, or a
game between agents defending the network and agents that
attempt to compromise it. A common method used to find
a solution to this class of problem is reinforcement learning
(RL) [7], which has been applied in the context of incident
response by several authors [8], [9]. RL assumes the dynamics
of the problem is not known, which is common for real-world
problems, but that the agent can receive observations of the
problem state and affect the state through a set of actions.
Computer networks are often dynamic in structure, with
hosts connecting and disconnecting over time. We consider
it an important feature that a network management agent can
handle changes to the network with no additional training, so
called zero-shot generalization. There are several proposed
methods for facilitating zero-shot generalization in reinforce-
ment learning [10]. One approach is relational reinforcement
learning, where knowledge about relations between objects
in a domain is assumed to be transferable across problem
instances [11].
We use an approach for relational reinforcement learning
proposed by [12] and adapt it to a network security problem.
The state of the computer network is represented as a relational
graph, which is encoded with a message-passing neural network
(MPNN). An agent then uses this encoding to take actions on
objects represented in the graph. We also evaluate a modified
version of the approach where the agent only incorporates
information from the local neighborhood of the graph. We
evaluate the MPNN agent on the second iteration of the Cyber
Autonomy Gym for Experimentation ( CAGE), a two-player
cyber security incident simulator. Previous work has noted that
agents trained in this environment have issues with structural
generalization [6]. We create a number of variants of the
original network topology used in CAGE 2 and use these
to test the generalization capabilities of agents. Our results
demonstrate that an agent which encodes the network state
using an MPNN can generalize with no additional training
on these variants, something an agent using a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) encoder and vector representations can not.
II. B ACKGROUND
A. CAGE and CybORG
The Cyber Autonomy Gym for Experimentation ( CAGE)
is a collection of four cyber security scenario simulators
developed by the Technical Cooperation Program ( TTCP). All
arXiv:2407.05775v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jul 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
Fig. 1. Image of computer network simulated in CAGE 2 presented on the
developers GitHub repository. During a match, the red team starts from an
user host and attempts to reach the operational server. This can be achieved
by first compromising one of the enterprise servers, which can communicate
with the operational machines.
were released as part of public competitions to facilitate the
development of automated cyber operation agents. The CAGE
scenarios share a common underlying simulator infrastructure,
the Cyber Operations Research Gym (CybORG) [13]. Although
initially described as a simulator where scenarios could be
replicated in an emulator of virtual machines, the publicly
released portions of CybORG consists of only the simulator.
The developers have confirmed that development of the
emulator has ceased. The first two scenarios are set in a
corporate network and use the same network topology, with
the second scenario adding more actions for the red and blue
agents. The third CAGE scenario consists of a network of
aerial drones under attack. The fourth and most recent scenario
returns to the network defense domain, but in a multiagent
context. We focus on the second scenario, which we will refer
to it as CAGE 2 1.
The scenario premise of CAGE 2 is that a computer network
in a manufacturing plant is under attack by a hostile entity.
There are two teams acting within the network: A “red” team,
consisting of an automated agent, attempts to gain control of
machines in the network, with the ultimate goal of reaching
the operational server; A “blue” team of network operators
attempts to stop the red team from compromising hosts in
the network. The network consists of 13 hosts divided into
three subnets, separated by firewalls that only allow traffic
between certain subnets. An image from the CAGE 2 GitHub
repository showing the computer network is presented in 1.
A graph representation of the network is shown in Figure 2,
with host names as nodes and edges representing connections
between them. A third, “green”, team is included in the scenario
description, representing normal users causing false alerts.
However, it is not used in the challenge evaluation, nor in
previous work as far as we are aware.
The blue team can act in the network using 13 commands.
Ten commands take a host descriptor as a singular parameter,
and two actions use no parameters. These are the commands
“Sleep” and “Monitor”, which function as NoOp actions. The
“Remove” command will remove red team access from a
specified host. The red team can gain two levels of authority on
a host. If the red team has reached the second level, “Remove”
1www.github.com/cage-challenge/cage-challenge-2
Defender
Enterprise_router
Enterprise0 Enterprise1 Enterprise2 Operational_router User_router
Op_Host1 Op_Host2 Op_Server0 User1User2 User3 User4
Op_Host0 User0
Fig. 2. Graph representation of network structure used in CAGE 2.
will not work and access can only be removed by the “Restore”
command. The command “Analyze” returns a list of processes
and files on a specified host. This can inform the blue team
that the red team has gained access to the host. The blue team
can use eight “Decoy” commands 2. These create processes on
a specified host that the red team will always fail to exploit.
The observed state provided to both teams is a mapping from
host names to lists of simulated processes, network connections
and files. CAGE 2 also provides a wrapper function that encodes
the mapping into a single vector. The wrapper function applies
a set of heuristics to the host data, and provides two categorical
values per host. One indicates a type of activity that has been
observed on the host, which is based on port usage. The
other shows what level of access privileges the red agent has
obtained on the host. This is based on the number of open
connections, and the list of files on the host. The wrapper
function encodes the categorical values to binary, making the
state vector 4·13 = 52 elements long. In addition to simplifying
the observation space, the wrapper flattens the parametric action
space. This gives the blue team 2 + (13 · 11) = 145 actions.
All related works we are aware of have used the wrapped
observation and action spaces for blue team agents. There is
no defined terminal state for the simulation. The evaluation
used for the challenge truncates each round at one of 30,
50 or 100 steps. During an ongoing game, the red team can
continually keep attempting to compromise hosts as they can
never be fully removed from the network. CAGE 2 includes
two heuristic agents to act as the red team, named “B-Line”
and “Meander”. “Meander” operates similar to a breadth-first
search, where it attempts to gain access to all machines in a
subnet before moving on to the next. “B-line” selects hosts
from a predefined list of hosts, which constitute the shortest
path between the attacker starting point and the operational
server.
Scoring for the blue team is based on both red team actions
and their own actions. When the red team gains access to a
system, the blue team receives a penalty. The size of the penalty
is proportional to the importance of the host to the organization,
with the operational server being the most important. The blue
team also receives a penalty each time the “Restore” action
is performed on a host. As part of the challenge, CAGE 2
uses a standardized evaluation scheme. Agents are evaluated
against both the B-Line and Meander agents on 1000 episodes
2There is a discrepancy between the code and the documentation. The code
contains eight decoys, but the documentation only lists seven. The “Sleep”
command is not listed either.

--- PAGE 3 ---
with lengths of 30, 50 and 100 steps. Average rewards are
calculated for each pairing, and a total score is calculated as
the sum of average rewards. The highest possible score for is
0.
B. Learning from Graphs
Graphs are data structures that represent relationships or
interactions between objects or entities. In a simple formulation,
a graph consists of a set of nodes V = {v1, . . . , vn},
representing objects, and edges E ⊆

(u, v) | (u, v) ∈ V 2	
representing relations between objects. Many functions and
algorithms have been proposed to analyze aspects of graph-
structured data [14]. We focus on message-passing algorithms,
where node representations are at every iteration updated using
an aggregation of messages from their immediate neighborhood.
A general message passing update rule is
hl
v = UPDATE(AGGREGATE(v), hl−1
v ) (1)
where AGGREGATE is a permutation invariant aggregation
function, and UPDATE is a function of the aggregated neigh-
borhood of v and the node feature at step l. A graph repre-
sentations can be obtained through an aggregation of the node
representations. As long as all aggregations are permutation
invariant, message passing algorithms create representations of
the graph that are permutation invariant and equivariant [14,
Ch. 5].
The update and aggregation functions of the message-passing
function in Equation 1 can be implemented using neural
networks, forming as class of methods called message-passing
neural network ( MPNN). MPNNs shares parameters across
nodes, meaning that although the size of an input graph may
change, the number of parameters in the model does not
necessarily need to. There are several proposed architectures
of MPNN, which use different schemes of aggregations
and updates. These have different abilities to represent and
discriminate graph structures, and some will fail to discriminate
certain graph structures [15].
Representations produced by message passing are dependent
on the number of iterations the algorithm runs, which is
equivalent to the number of layers in an MPNN. This dictates
the size of the receptive field of each node or, put in another
way, how far information travel between nodes in the graph.
With too few steps, node features may not be expressive
enough to be distinguished. On the other hand, as the number
of message-passing steps increase, node representations may
become homogenized across the graph, a concept referred to
as over-smoothing. The optimal number of message passing
iterations is dependent on the graph and the downstream task.
The term MPNN is sometimes used interchangeably with
graph neural network (GNN). We prefer to use the term MPNN
as not all neural networks applied on graphs use message-
passing, making GNN a broader descriptor than the methods
we use require.
C. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning is a field of machine learning for
solving decision and control problems [7]. Problems solved
with reinforcement learning can usually be expressed as a
Markov decision process ( MDP). An MDP can be described
as a tuple of states, actions, rewards and state transition
probabilities. The reward function R : A × S → R associates
each state and action pair with a real value. For a finite MDP,
the goal of an agent is to maximize the expected total reward
G =PT
t Rt, where T is the step the MDP terminates at.
In each state an agent decides on an action using a policy, a
function from a state to an action or distribution over actions,
π : S → ∆(A). The value of a policy π is denoted as V π,
and is the expected total reward in a state s when following
the policy π. An optimal policy π∗ is associated with the
optimal value function V ∗ := max π Vπ(s). Reinforcement
learning methods attempt to approximate the optimal policy or
value function through continuous interaction with the problem.
Policy gradient reinforcement learning methods optimize the
policy function towards the optimal policy through gradient
descent. Actor-critic methods extend this method by also
estimating the value function as part of the optimization
process.
For some problems, decisions can naturally be factorized
into a series or set of action variables. This includes the CAGE
2 environment described in Section II-A, where actions are
separated into hosts and commands. Given a problem with
a joint action a = ( a1 . . . , ai), the probability of taking a
in the state S can be expressed as a product of conditional
probabilities,
π(a|S) =
|a|Y
i
πi(ai|S, a1, . . . , ai−1) (2)
Similar forms of policy factorization has been used in previous
works on reinforcement learning [5], [12], [16].
D. Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning
We use an architecture for relational learning named Sym-
bolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning (SR-DRL) [12].
SR-DRL is intended for problem domains that can be repre-
sented using objects and actions are taken on those objects.
Objects in the problem and their relations are represented
as a relational graph, and an MPNN is used to encode the
graph as input to a policy function. Policy factorization is
used to separate joint actions into conditional parameters for
additional flexibility in representation. SR-DRL generates a
whole-graph representation in addition to node representations.
The graph representation is updated sequentially after each
message-passing step, incorporating the previous representation
in the next iteration. The MPNN and policy function are
trained end-to-end using reinforcement learning. An action-
critic scheme is used when training agents, where the value
function estimator is implemented as a neural network taking
the graph representation as input.
III. I MPLEMENTATION OF MPNN A GENTS ON CAGE 2
To apply the SR-DRL approach on CAGE 2, we reshape
the vector observation space into a relational graph. We also
modify the action space. An agent has to make two decisions

--- PAGE 4 ---
at each turn: a command to run and a host to run it on. This is
reformulated as the agent selecting a node in the graph, and then
an action based on the node representation. We use proximal
policy optimization ( PPO) to learn a policy function, but any
policy gradient method, such as A2C can be used instead. Code
use for training and evaluating agents is available on GitHub 3
As described in Section II-D, SR-DRL incorporates the
full graph representation as part of the local node representa-
tions [12]. We hypothesize that including the graph representa-
tion in the state is unnecessary for problems where reasoning
only requires information from the local neighborhood of a
node. To test this, we evaluate a modified agent that removes
the graph component of the policy input alongside the original
version used for SR-DRL. The resulting agent only incorporates
the graph representation to estimate the value function during
training. During inference, the agent only uses information
from a k-hop neighborhood to act, where k is the number
of message-passing steps. Another change that comes from
using only local information is the policy factorization. The
implementation of SR-DRL factorizes the policy such that the
agent first selects an action to take, based on the global graph
representation, and then what object to act on. In order to only
use the local context, we flip this ordering. The agent thus
first selects the object to act on, and then what command to
execute on it.
A. Local Message-Passing Scheme
The local message passing scheme is largely unchanged
from the original implementation [12], albeit with the graph
representation removed from the node update. The update to
the representation h for a node v at layer l is thus defined as
hl
v = hl−1
v + ϕagg((v, vmsg)), (3)
where
vmsg = max
u∈N (n)
ϕmsg(u). (4)
The graph representation update at layer l is
gl = gl−1 + ϕglb
 
(gl−1, f(V))

(5)
where
f(V) =
X
v∈V
softmax(ϕatt(v)) · ϕf eat(v), (6)
an attention-based aggregation scheme proposed by [17]. Each
function ϕ is implemented as a single-layer neural network,
ϕ(x; W, b) = ρ(xWT + b), where ρ is a non-linear activation
function.
B. Policy Decomposition
The local approach decomposes the policy of the agent into
two actions, where the agent first selects a node in the graph
and then what action should be taken on it. In our notation,
E denotes the size of the representation vectors and N the
amount of nodes, |V|. Hl
N ×E = {hl
1, . . . , hl
N } is a multiset
3www.github.com/kasanari/incident-response-rl-gnn
Fig. 3. Schematic showing the computation paths for action probabilities and
state value on a graph with two node and two edges.
of node representations after l message passes. C the set of
commands from CAGE 2. We formulate the factorized policy
function as
π(vi, ci|Hl) = π2(cj|hl
i, vi)π1(vi|Hl) (7)
where
π1(V = vi|Hl) = σi({φ1(hl
1), . . . , φ1(hl
N)}) (8)
π2(C = cj|hl
i, V = vi) = σj(φ2(hl
i)) (9)
and
σi(x) = exi
PK
j=1 exj
, (10)
φ1 : RE → R and φ2 : RE → R|C|.
The value function estimation is defined as a function of the
graph encoding gl
1×E,
V π(gl) = φv(gl) (11)
where φv : RE → R. The critic is only used during training, so
the graph representation is not required during inference. Each
function φ was implemented as a linear transformation, where
φ(x; W, b) = xWT +b. A schematic showing the computation
paths of the various values is shown in Figure 3.
C. Changes to CAGE 2
We introduced two changes to the CAGE 2 implementation,
which we based on commit b5a71c4 4 of CybORG. Our options
were to either work from the version of CAGE 2 in the most
recent commit of CybORG, or the older version used for the
challenge. We opted for the more recent version, as we found
it easier to work with.
The first change was reshaping the observation space to
a graph, in order to use an MPNN agent. We converted the
4www.github.com/cage-challenge/CybORG

--- PAGE 5 ---
0000
0000
0000
0000
0000
0000
0000
0000
0000
0000
0000
0110
0000
0010
0010
0010
Fig. 4. A state graph at a given point of the CAGE 2 simulation. Each node
has two categorical attributes encoded to binary using two bits each. The first
attribute indicates the observed activity, and the second the access privilege of
the red team agent on that host.
existing CAGE 2 vector state representation into a homoge-
neous undirected graph. In the graph, each host is represented
as a node with a single edge type relating them to other
hosts. Each host has two attributes, same as in the original
vector, as described in Section II-A. Nodes were connected
such that the graph matched the network layout described in
the challenge description. Routers were included as nodes,
though no observations are associated with them in CAGE 2.
They were therefore set to always have no activity, never be
compromised and not included in the action space of the blue
team. An example of a state graph is shown in Figure 4.
The second change was to the set of allowed actions for
the blue team. We removed the host that the red team starts
at from the set of hosts that the agent can interact with, and
decoy deployment actions were not used. Motivations for these
changes are provided in Section VII-B.
IV. E VALUATION
Our evaluation of the MPNN agent consisted of training
agents in an environment configuration, and then testing the
agent on a set of network variants. We only trained against the
Meander agent, as it provided more varied observations than
the B-Line agent. Previous work on CAGE 2 trained against a
combination of attackers, switching between them at random
between episodes [6], or switched between models depending
on the attacker [4]. In our opinion, access to all forms of red
team behavior during training should not be assumed. We thus
withheld the B-Line policy during training and used it for
evaluation only. The relational learning scheme we employ is
not intended to generalize across opponent policies, and the
ability to do so is only a fortunate side effect. Episodes were
truncated after 50 steps during training. In the absence of blue
team interference, this is enough for the Meander agent to be
able to reach the operational server.
To evaluate the ability of agents to generalize across
structural changes, we created variants of the original network
by removing different hosts. Host were selected on the condition
that red team agents using both the B-Line and Meander
policies could reach the operational host without them. Given
this condition, we generated six network variants, each one
with an additional randomly selected eligible host removed.
This resulted in seven network variants, which includes the
original network of 16 hosts. Changing the number of hosts
in the network not only changes the observation space of the
problem, but also the action space, as the number of machines
under the control of the blue team changes. We trained MPNN
agents on the network variant with 13 hosts, and evaluate
on all variants. This setup gave three larger networks, and
three smaller, to evaluate agents on. A specialized MLP agent
was trained for each network variant for comparison with the
general MPNN agent. We chose an MLP agent for comparison
as they have been used in previous work on CAGE 2 [6].
Agents were rated by the scoring scheme described in
Section II-A, that test agents with different episode lengths
and red teams, as in previous work [4], [6].
The scale of the rewards change depending on the network
size and episode length, making comparisons of agents for
multiple problem instances difficult. As an alternative perfor-
mance metric, we calculated the percentage of episodes where
the agent did not receive any negative reward, which we call a
“perfect round”. A perfect round thus means that the blue team
managed to stop the red team without receiving a penalty.
Agent training and evaluation was done on a machine
equipped with 32 GB of RAM, an Intel Xeon Silver CPU
with 24 1GHz cores and an NVIDIA Quadro RTX 4000 GPU.
Training is also possible on more limited hardware, such as a
laptop equipped with 16 GB of RAM and an 11th Gen. Intel i7
CPU. Our code implementation relies on PyTorch Geometric
for the message-passing algorithm. We used proximal policy
optimization to train agents, as was also done by [6]. The
PPO and MLP implementations were sourced from Stable
Baselines 3. The code for the MPNN policy is based on the
implementation by [18], who in turn ported the code from the
original authors [12] to work with Stable Baselines 3. Different
selections of hyperparameters were not extensively evaluated,
but we present results for MPNN agents with different numbers
of layers. We do not include MPNN agents with a layer depth
of one, as these were significantly worse than the layer variants.
All agents were trained using 500 000 steps of each environment
in total.
V. E VALUATION RESULTS
An immediate difference between agents using MLP and
MPNN models was the training time. With our implementation,
MPNN training was roughly 10 times slower than MLP training.
In concrete numbers, training each MLP model took roughly
4 minutes, and each MPNN model 40 minutes. The difference
was alleviated, however, by the fact that we trained less MPNN
agents overall, as we did not have to train a separate agent for
every scenario variant.
We calculated average rewards and the total score following
the challenge rules, meaning that each combination of attacker,
episode length and agent was evaluated for 1000 episodes. The
total score presented in Table II is the sum of average rewards

--- PAGE 6 ---
16 15 14 13 12 11 10
Number of Hosts in Network
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Average Reward
Average Reward for Agent T ypes on Network Variants
MLP (Trained on Each Variant) Untrained MLP MPNN-L-3 (Trained with 10 Hosts) MPNN-G-3 (Trained with 10 Hosts)
Fig. 5. Bar chart showing rewards for trained and untrained agents averaged over 1000 episodes. MLP agents were specially trained on each network variant.
MPNN agents were only trained on the network variant with 13 hosts, and evaluated on others. Agents were trained and evaluated against the Meander red
team policy, with episode lengths of 50 steps.
for each configuration. Average rewards for each network
variant is shown in Figure 5. We denote the MPNN variants
with the shorthand “[GL]- x”, where “G” and “L” denote if
the model uses global or local representations described in
Section III-A, and x denotes the number of layers the model
uses. We emphasize that scores are not directly comparable
to those of previous work, such as [4] or [6]. The version
of CybORG is different, and we omitted actions from the
action set that is to the benefit the blue team. We also note
that our comparisons are primarily qualitative. The difference
between the MPNN models and the MLP is not that the
MPNNs performs better or worse at the different scenarios,
it is that a trained MLP agent simply can not function at all
without modification when the observation space changes in
size. In general, quantitative differences in rewards between
agent variants are not easy to discern with CAGE 2, as has
been noted previously [6]. Deviations in scores is high for
all agents, relative to the average. We include the scores of
an untrained MLP agent, which serve as a baseline zero-shot
solution to the problem.
Our primary result is that MPNN agents received scores
and percentages of perfect rounds significantly higher than the
baseline on network variants not trained on. Scores and the
percentages of perfect rounds of MPNN models were lower
than those of the trained MLP ensemble, but we note that this
is comparing a single agent using one MPNN to an agent using
a collection of seven MLP models specially trained on each
network variant. L-3 received the highest total score out of
the MPNN variants, and L-4 the highest percentage of perfect
rounds. The local versions of the MPNN have higher total
scores than their global equivalents in aggregate. This lends
some credit, albeit not much given the high variance, to our
hypothesis that local information is sufficient to find a solution
to this problem. The MPNN agents obtain perfect scores on
two network variants that the trained MLP agent does not. The
untrained MLP agent ensemble never achieves a perfect round,
indicating that this can not be done through random action.
Table II shows the total scores for all MPNN variants and
the MLP ensemble agents, averaged over all seven network
variants. Table I shows the percentages of perfects rounds with
each network variant.
TABLE I
PERCENTAGES OF EPISODES WITH NO PENALTIES AVERAGED OVER ALL
RED TEAM AND EPISODE LENGTH CONFIGURATIONS . MPNN AGENTS WERE
ONLY TRAINED WITH 13 HOSTS . MLP AGENTS WERE TRAINED ON EACH
NETWORK VARIANT .
Hosts 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
MPNN Episodes With No Penalty (%)
G-2 5 0 17 0 0 32 0
G-3 1 2 28 23 0 50 74
G-4 0 0 1 0 0 7 1
L-2 12 0 0 0 0 0 0
L-3 17 0 32 18 0 8 49
L-4 10 4 44 34 0 34 89
MLP Episodes With No Penalty (%)
Trained 49 0 77 50 0 0 100
Untrained 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
VI. R ELATED WORK
There exists several cyber incident simulators with different
assumptions5 and associated solution methods [9]. In the
interest of space, we limit works in described in this section
to those that use CAGE 2 in some form. We make one
exception to this limitation and highlight the work of [3], that
combines reinforcement learning, relational graph learning and
cyber security similarly to us. They evaluate their approach
on another cyber incident simulator, Yawning Titan, which
is more abstract than CybORG. Our implementation differs
from theirs in that they use a graph embedding algorithm
named Feather-G, a method for graph representation based on
characteristic functions [19]. It is not explicitly stated in the
text that the action space is generalized to different number
5github.com/Limmen/awesome-rl-for-cybersecurity

--- PAGE 7 ---
TABLE II
SUM OF AVERAGE REWARDS AND PERCENTAGES OF EPISODES WITH NO
PENALTIES , AGGREGATED OVER ALL COMBINATIONS OF NETWORK SIZES ,
EPISODE LENGTHS AND RED TEAM POLICIES . MPNN MODELS WERE ONLY
TRAINED WITH 13 HOSTS . MLP RESULTS ARE AVERAGES FOR SEVEN
AGENTS TRAINED ON EACH NETWORK .
Agent Episodes With No Penalty Sum Average Reward
MPNN
G-2 8% -154 ± 42
G-3 25% -270 ± 252
G-4 1% -172 ± 63
L-2 2% -136 ± 22
L-3 18% -113 ± 63
L-4 31% -150 ± 99
MLP (Ensemble)
Trained 39% -78 ± 42
Untrained 0% -2104 ± 605
of hosts. In principle, we could use the node-level version
of Feather, Feather-N, to represent nodes as we do with the
MPNN.
Our starting point for studying previous work on CAGE 2 are
agents that obtained high scores on the challenge. The winners
of the challenge, a team from Cardiff University, used an
MLP agent trained using PPO in combination with handwritten
heuristics. The agent uses a static policy for deploying decoys,
derived from a greedy search over the space of possible decoys
that can be deployed. The agent also uses hard-coded heuristics
to determine which one out of two policies to use in a given
episode, one for each red-team policy, and limit the blue team’s
actions to those that are strictly useful. Although effective in the
challenge, this agent formulation can not generalize to unseen
configurations, as its scenario-specific heuristics would need
to be manually updated. The runner-up on the leaderboard is
another MLP agent by a team from the Alan Turing Institute,
also trained using PPO. It uses two policy functions with
different observation spaces that are switched between by a
higher-level policy. The policy used against Meander uses the
unmodified observation space, and the one used against B-Line
adds information about the number of ports to each host. In
terms of the ability to generalize, this is better than the Cardiff
approach as it does not hard-code parts of the policy. However,
it is still bound to a particular size of the network.
There are works outside the challenge that have used CAGE
2 for development and evaluation. [4] trained agents with
different forms of reward shaping on the environment. They
base their work on the model by Cardiff University, which
in our opinion makes conclusions difficult due to the issues
of hard-coding mentioned previously. [20] trains agents on
CAGE 2 using a version of deep Q-learning. Similar to us,
they create three scenario variants to test their agent, but
have to train a separate agent on each version due to their
approach being locked to a specific network size. They also
note that their approach has issues when introducing additional
hosts to the network, but the causes of these issues are not
made clear. [6] evaluates a set of neural network models on
CAGE 2 on different configurations. The experiments are
intended to evaluate attributes that they consider important
when agents are applied in real systems, such as inference
time and generalization. They note that their agents trained
with RL on CAGE 2 are challenged by changes to the network
configuration, such as the topology, and differences in the
attacker policy.
VII. D ISCUSSION
From the results of our experiments, we see that the MPNN
agents perform better on the unseen network variants than the
untrained MLP baseline. We also see that they can obtain a
nonzero percentage of rounds where the red team does not
capture any machines, and the blue team does not receive any
penalty. We take this as evidence that the MPNN agents are
capable of zero-shot generalization in this problem domain.
The zero-shot performance is worse than that of MLP policies
specifically trained on the network variant. This is in line
with results obtained by [12], where the MPNN agents tend
to be outperformed by one-shot planners on specific problem
instances. The difference in results indicates a trade-off between
generalization and specialization. We do not know if a fully
generalized policy is possible to find for this problem, but work
has been done to analyze this question in other domains [21].
We chose MLP agents as an upper bound of performance,
as they are often used in previous work on the CAGE 2
environment. However, these are likely worse than a theoretical
optimal policy, meaning that we do not know how close the
zero-shot policy is to optimal. We can see from Table I that
for some network variants, both the MLP and MPNN agents
have few to no perfect rounds.
A. Limits of Relational Learning
An inductive bias of relational reinforcement learning is
that the properties and relationships between objects remain
constant. This may not be true, depending on the problem
domain. In our problem, changing the red team policy will
change the underlying dynamics of the problem, and the change
in representation that the MPNN introduces does not directly
address this. It may indirectly do so if the relational rules
learned by the agent is general enough to counter any red team
policy, but this is also true for a policy that can be learned
by an MLP agent. Other methods of zero-shot learning would
need to be applied to address this issue [10].
B. Changes made to CAGE 2
We made a set of changes to the CAGE 2 environment. We
removed the host that the red team starts at from the blue
team action space. The starting host is different from other
hosts in that blue team commands fail when used on it. This
is to ensure the red team always has access to the network.
If vector observations are used, there is no way to identify
the starting host other than by its position in the vector. We
chose to not include decoy actions for similar reasons. The
decoy actions have specific sets of requirements that need to be
fulfilled in order to execute them. This includes ports not being

--- PAGE 8 ---
in use, or the host running a particular operating system. This
information is not present in the wrapped observation space,
and only the position of the host in the vector encodes this
information. In both these cases the position of the host in the
state vector acts as an implicit host identifier. This information
is lost when the vector is reshaped to a graph, but makes the
agent using the graph more general. We can assign a unique
label to each node in the graph, which would allow an agent
to fully differentiate between objects. However, it also means
that the rules learned will be specific to that set of objects and
less generally applicable. We could also add the object class
to nodes, but then we have to design a fitting ontology. Our
opinion is that CAGE 2 is an interesting environment, albeit
one that is slightly oversimplified. We believe future work
should focus on utilizing the unwrapped observation space,
which contains information more in line with what an actual
network intrusion detection system would produce.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
We implemented agents for automated network intrusion
response that use message-passing neural networks to encode
facts about the network. The agents were evaluated using a
simulated network environment, the Cyber Autonomy Gym
for Experimentation. Our results show that our agents can
generalize across network variants without additional training
but are outperformed by specially trained policies, indicating a
trade-off between generalization and specialization. Our work
addresses an issue present in previous work on automated
incident response [4], [6]: That agents are bound to a specific
size, structure and ordering of the network topology. This
is in spite of computer networks being highly variable in
structure, and a network operator needs to handle such changes
while enacting security policies. We believe that by exploiting
relational structure in the problem, agents for cyber incident
response can be made more general and reusable. Reusing
agents in problems with a different structure, but similar
dynamics saves both time and energy, which we consider
important for practical use.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Applebaum, C. Dennler, P. Dwyer, M. Moskowitz, H. Nguyen,
N. Nichols, N. Park, P. Rachwalski, F. Rau, A. Webster, and M. Wolk,
“Bridging automated to autonomous cyber defense: Foundational analysis
of tabular q-learning,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop on
Artificial Intelligence and Security, ser. AISec’22. New York, NY , USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, pp. 149–159.
[2] S. Roy, C. Ellis, S. Shiva, D. Dasgupta, V . Shandilya, and Q. Wu, “A
survey of game theory as applied to network security,” in 2010 43rd
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 2010, pp. 1–10.
[3] J. Collyer, A. Andrew, and D. Hodges, “Acd-g: Enhancing autonomous
cyber defense agent generalization through graph embedded network
representation.” NeurIPS 2022 Workshop, Reinforcement Learning for
Real Life, 2022.
[4] E. Bates, V . Mavroudis, and C. Hicks, “Reward shaping for happier
autonomous cyber security agents,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM
Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security , ser. AISec ’23. New
York, NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, pp. 221–
232.
[5] K. Hammar and R. Stadler, “Finding effective security strategies
through reinforcement learning and self-play,” in 2020 16th International
Conference on Network and Service Management (CNSM) . IEEE, 2020,
pp. 1–9.
[6] M. Wolk, A. Applebaum, C. Dennler, P. Dwyer, M. Moskowitz,
H. Nguyen, N. Nichols, N. Park, P. Rachwalski, F. Rau, and A. Webster,
“Beyond cage: Investigating generalization of learned autonomous network
defense policies.” International Conference on Machine Learning
Workshop, ML4Cyber, 2022.
[7] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction .
MIT press, 2018.
[8] T. T. Nguyen and V . J. Reddi, “Deep reinforcement learning for cyber
security,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems ,
vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 3779–3795, 2023.
[9] A. M. K. Adawadkar and N. Kulkarni, “Cyber-security and
reinforcement learning — a brief survey,” Engineering Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 114, p. 105116, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0952197622002512
[10] R. Kirk, A. Zhang, E. Grefenstette, and T. Rockt ¨aschel, “A
survey of zero-shot generalisation in deep reinforcement learning,” J.
Artif. Intell. Res. , vol. 76, pp. 201–264, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.14174
[11] S. Dzeroski, L. D. Raedt, and K. Driessens, “Relational reinforcement
learning,” Mach. Learn., vol. 43, no. 1/2, pp. 7–52, 2001.
[12] J. Janisch, T. Pevn´y, and V . Lis´y, “Symbolic relational deep reinforcement
learning based on graph neural networks and autoregressive policy
decomposition,” 2023.
[13] M. Standen, M. Lucas, D. Bowman, T. J. Richer, J. Kim, and D. Marriott,
“Cyborg: A gym for the development of autonomous cyber agents,” in
IJCAI-21 1st International Workshop on Adaptive Cyber Defense. , 2021.
[14] W. L. Hamilton, Graph Representation Learning . Springer, 2020.
[15] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful
are graph neural networks?” in 7th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA,
USA, May 6-9, 2019 . OpenReview.net, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km
[16] O. Vinyals, T. Ewalds, S. Bartunov, P. Georgiev, A. S. Vezhnevets,
M. Yeo, A. Makhzani, H. K ¨uttler, J. Agapiou, J. Schrittwieser, J. Quan,
S. Gaffney, S. Petersen, K. Simonyan, T. Schaul, H. van Hasselt, D. Silver,
T. Lillicrap, K. Calderone, P. Keet, A. Brunasso, D. Lawrence, A. Ekermo,
J. Repp, and R. Tsing, “Starcraft ii: A new challenge for reinforcement
learning,” 2017.
[17] Y . Li, C. Gu, T. Dullien, O. Vinyals, and P. Kohli, “Graph matching
networks for learning the similarity of graph structured objects,” in
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA , ser. Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, K. Chaudhuri and R. Salakhutdinov,
Eds., vol. 97. PMLR, 2019, pp. 3835–3845.
[18] A. Chester, M. Dann, F. Zambetta, and J. Thangarajah, “Oracle-sage:
Planning ahead in graph-based deep reinforcement learning,” in Machine
Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases . Cham: Springer
Nature Switzerland, 2023, pp. 52–67.
[19] B. Rozemberczki and R. Sarkar, “Characteristic Functions on Graphs:
Birds of a Feather, from Statistical Descriptors to Parametric Models,” in
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’20) . ACM, 2020, pp. 1325–1334.
[20] Z. Zhu, M. Chen, C. Zhu, and Y . Zhu, “Effective defense strategies
in network security using improved double dueling deep q-network,”
Computers & Security , vol. 136, p. 103578, 2024.
[21] J. Mao, T. Lozano-P ´erez, J. B. Tenenbaum, and L. P. Kaelbling, “What
planning problems can A relational neural network solve?” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New
Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023 , A. Oh, T. Naumann,
A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, Eds., 2023.
[Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper files/paper/2023/hash/
ba90e56a74fd77d0ddec033dc199f0fa-Abstract-Conference.html