
--- PAGE 1 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning
based on Graph Neural Networks
Jarom´ır Janisch 1 Tom´aˇs Pevn´y 1 Viliam Lis´y 1
Abstract
We focus on reinforcement learning (RL) in re-
lational problems that are naturally deﬁned in
terms of objects, their relations, and manipula-
tions. These problems are characterized by vari-
able state and action spaces, and ﬁnding a ﬁxed-
length representation, required by most existing
RL methods, is difﬁcult, if not impossible. We
present a deep RL framework based on graph
neural networks and auto-regressive policy de-
composition that naturally works with these prob-
lems and is completely domain-independent. We
demonstrate the framework in three very distinct
domains and we report the method’s competitive
performance and impressive zero-shot generaliza-
tion over different problem sizes. In goal-oriented
BlockWorld, we demonstrate multi-parameter ac-
tions with pre-conditions. In SysAdmin, we show
how to select multiple objects simultaneously. In
the classical planning domain of Sokoban, the
method trained exclusively on 10
×10 problems
with three boxes solves 89% of 15 ×15 problems
with ﬁve boxes.
1. Introduction
In this work, we take a fresh look at Relational Reinforce-
ment Learning (RRL; Dˇzeroski et al., 2001) with the modern
approaches of Deep Reinforcement Learning (Deep RL). In
contrast to the modern trend of applying Deep RL on the
raw visual input (e.g., Mnih et al., 2015; Jaderberg et al.,
2019), we target tasks of relational and symbolic nature.
The world in these tasks consists of discrete objects, their
relations, and actions that directly manipulate them. Such
tasks naturally occur all around us. For example, a sim-
1Artiﬁcial Intelligence Center, Department of Computer
Science, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical
University in Prague. Correspondence to: Jarom
´ır Janisch
<jaromir.janisch@fel.cvut.cz>.
Reinforcement Learning for Real Life (RL4RealLife) Workshop in
the 38 th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021.
Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
C
B
A
 C
B
A
start goal
(a) BlockWorld (b) SysAdmin (c) Sokoban
Figure 1: Three domains where we demonstrate our method.
In the BlockWorld game, the task is to reconﬁgure blocks
into a goal position. In SysAdmin, computers in a network
where nodes need to be selectively restarted to keep them
running. Sokoban is a classic planning domain, where we
include a twist – actions are applied directly on the objects.
In all three domains, the key challenge is to zero-shot
generalize to different problem sizes .
ple task of cooking integrates a complex system of objects
in various relations and possible actions. Online services
with an API, social networks, computer network penetra-
tion testing, medical diagnosis, and factory assembly line
optimizations are examples of these environments.
To illustrate the setting, look at BlockWorld (Slaney &
Thi
´ebaux, 2001) in Figure 1a. Initially, several labeled
blocks are stacked on top of each other in an arbitrary conﬁg-
uration. The task is to reconﬁgure them into a goal position,
using a move action that picks a block and puts it on top
of another, or to the ground. The challenge is to approach
the problem in a truly symbolic way. That is, using the
move action with two parameters, without being ﬁxed to a
pre-deﬁned set of blocks. Current Deep RL focuses mostly
on visual-control domains (e.g., Leibo et al., 2018) that dif-
fer mainly in their ﬁxed state and action space dimensions.
Some of the described problems could be transformed into
visual control domains. However, for many tasks, a natural
and easier representation is within the relational framework.
In planning, Relational Dynamic Inﬂuence Diagram Lan-
guage (RDDL; Sanner, 2010) is often used to describe the
mechanics of a relational domain. Recently, Garg et al.
(2020) introduced SymNet, a method that automatically ex-
tracts objects, interactions, and action templates from any
RDDL. The interacting objects are joined to tuples and repre-
sented as a node in a graph; the interactions are represented
arXiv:2009.12462v3  [cs.LG]  26 Jul 2021

--- PAGE 2 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
as edges. Graph Neural Network (GNN; Zhou et al., 2018)
is used to create nodes’ embeddings. Actions templates,
each represented as a single non-linear function, are applied
over the object tuples to create a probability distribution.
Finally, actions and their parameters (the object tuples) are
selected, and the model is updated with a policy gradient
method (Li, 2018).
There are several drawbacks to the SymNet algorithm. Al-
though the actions share their representation, the ﬁnal step is
to apply the softmax function over all grounded actions. For
a problem with n objects and an action with p parameters,
this results in O(np) time and space complexity. For actions
where any subset of objects can become a parameter ( set ac-
tions), it is O(2n). Also, the method is applicable only when
the RDDL domain deﬁnition is available because it uses the
deﬁned transition dynamics to create the graph. In Deep
RL, it is common that the transition dynamics are unknown,
and only a simulator is available. For example, imagine a
visual control domain (e.g., controlling a robotic hand) with
automatic object detection (e.g., Redmon & Farhadi, 2018),
deﬁned actions manipulating these objects (possibly with a
low-level planner in place), and unknown dynamics.
This work presents a Symbolic Relational Deep RL (SR-
DRL) framework that addresses these issues. It accepts an
enriched symbolic input (i.e., objects and their relations,
optionally augmented with their features) in the form of a
graph, actions deﬁnitions and does not require the knowl-
edge of transition dynamics. The framework is designed to
generalize well over an arbitrary number of objects. Its main
components are based on graph neural networks (Zhou et al.,
2018), auto-regressive policy decomposition (Vinyals et al.,
2017), and policy gradient methods (Li, 2018). Compared
to SymNet, our framework works within O(pkn) time and
O(n) space complexity for multi-parameter actions (where
k is a maximal node degree in the graph and is usually small)
and O(n) time and space complexity for set actions.
We showcase the framework in three domains. BlockWorld
is a well-known planning domain with NP-hard complex-
ity for optimal planning. Here, we demonstrate a multi-
parameter action with a conditional dependency. Sokoban
is a game requiring extensive planning. We show how to
manipulate the game’s objects on the macro level, with
a low-level planner behind. SysAdmin is a graph-based
planning domain, where we demonstrate our framework’s
capability to select multiple nodes at once. In all three do-
mains, we show an impressive zero-shot generalization to
different problem sizes. In BlockWorld, the agent trained
only on ﬁve blocks can solve problems with 20 blocks with
a 78% success rate. In Sokoban, the agent trained in 10 ×10
problems with three boxes solves 89% of random 15 ×15
problems with ﬁve boxes. In SysAdmin, the agent trained
with 10 nodes generalizes almost perfectly to 160 nodes.
1.1. Related work
Payani & Fekri (2020) replace the hard logic of D ˇzeroski
et al. (2001) with a differentiable inductive logic program-
ming. In their approach, the logic predicates are fuzzy, and
the parameters are learned with gradient descent. Block-
World environment is also used for experiments. However,
the scope is very limited to only 4 and 5 blocks, without
goal generalization (the goal is to always stack into a single
tower), and the authors do not report any generalization.
Li et al. (2019) studies a 3-dimensional instantiation of
the BlockWorld problem with a robotic hand and physics
simulation. Interestingly, the features of the blocks (their
position and color) and the hand are encoded as a graph and
processed by a graph neural network (GNN) (Zhou et al.,
2018), making it invariant to the number of objects. Still,
all interaction with the world is done by controlling the
robotic hand and its elementary actions (relative change of
position and grasping controls). Moreover, the blocks are
not symbolic, but are identiﬁed by their features (color).
Hamrick et al. (2018) study the stability of a tower of blocks
in a physical simulation, with some blocks glued together.
The blocks and their physical features are encoded as nodes
in a graph, and the actions are performed on the graph’s
edges, which connect two adjoining blocks. The actions
are performed onto the blocks themselves, making this ap-
proach generalize well to different combinations and num-
bers of blocks. Similarly, Bapst et al. (2019) focus on a
task of creating block structures under physical simulation.
They follow a similar approach to ours; their architecture
is based on GNN and allows object-centric actions. How-
ever, these works focus on their speciﬁc domain and do not
provide a general framework. Comparatively, we describe a
domain-independent framework that works with heteroge-
neous relations, and multi-parameter and set actions.
Zambaldi et al. (2019) and Santoro et al. (2017) provide
specialized neural network architectures with relational in-
ductive biases that internally segment a visual input into
objects and process them relationally. Compared to our
work, these architectures cannot process symbolic input.
Garg et al. (2019) describe a GNN-based model trained with
Deep RL to learn an RDDL speciﬁed domain with zero-shot
generalization to different domain variations. However, it is
restricted only to single-parameter actions. In subsequent
work, Garg et al. (2020) remove this restriction and present
a different approach that automatically processes any RDDL
to create a domain-speciﬁc GNN-based architecture. We
discuss the main differences in the Introduction.
Adjodah et al. (2018) studies a control problem of maze-
navigation with a relational module. However, the studied
problem is heavily restricted. It is a ﬁxed size grid, and the
relations are represented as exhaustive binary combinations

--- PAGE 3 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
of all places in the grid. A relational module’s output is
encoded as a ﬁxed-size embedding and processed with a
standard MLP based Q-learning algorithm. No message
passing is involved, allowing the model to reason only with
the limited binary relations.
In visual domains where a relational description is not avail-
able, work of Garnelo et al. (2016) or Zelinka et al. (2019)
could be used for automatic object discovery.
2. Problem
Our problems naturally consist of objects, binary relations,
global context , and a goal deﬁnition. Our problems are
sequential; hence we assume existing transition dynamics.
We use the Markov Decision Process (MDP) formalism for
the following deﬁnitions. The MDP is a tuple (S, A, r, t, γ),
where S, A represent the state and action spaces, r, t are
reward and transition functions, and γ is the discount factor.
All of the MDP components are problem-dependent. The
reward function r can directly specify the goal or be more
subtle. For example, in the BlockWorld, the reward can
be deﬁned as a small negative value (e.g.,
− 0.1) per step
and a non-negative value when the goal is reached. The
parameter γ and the transition function t are directly deﬁned
by the particular environment. Because we use a model-free
method, the transition function can also be unknown (only
a simulator is needed). The deﬁnition of state and action
spaces is more complex and is described below.
2.1. State encoding
A state includes the key components – objects and their
features, relations, global context, and optionally the goal.
The objects and relations naturally form an oriented graph.
Nodes represent the objects and contain their features in
the form of a ﬁxed-length vector. More complicated feature
structures can be embedded using the existing techniques
(e.g., Pevn ´y & Somol, 2016; Zaheer et al., 2017). Hetero-
geneous objects can be recognized by a type-specifying
feature. Oriented edges represent the relations, including
their features and type. Symmetric relations can be trans-
formed into two opposite edges. The global context is a
vector specifying properties of the environment, unrelated
to any single object (e.g., time or the environment state).
In domains where the goal is static, it can be encoded using
the reward function. For instance-wise goals, it needs to be
encoded in the state. Depending on the particular domain,
the goal can be encoded either in the global context, in the
object features, or as part of the graph itself.
The particular deﬁnition of the state space S is problem-
dependent. As an example, Figure 2 illustrates a possible
state encoding of the BlockWorld game state previously
ground
A
B
C
ground
A
B
C
ground
A
B
C
(a) current state (b) goal (c) combined
Figure 2: Example state encoding of the BlockWorld game
state from Figure 1a. The objects and relations form the
graph, with a special node representing the ground. The
representation of the current state and the goal is combined
with different edge types. Nodes include a single feature
differentiating the blocks and ground; no other features
(e.g., labels) are present. Likewise, no global information is
needed in this example.
shown in Figure 1a. Objects and relations are encoded as
a graph, with a special node representing the ground (see
BlockWorld deﬁnition for details). Nodes contain only a
single feature, differentiating between a regular node and
the ground. The actual state and the goal are encoded with
different edge types, and their representation is combined.
2.2. Actions
The problems of our focus require actions with symbolic
parameters, i.e., the objects. An action is composed of
its label, set of parameters, and pre-conditions. We call
actions without any parameters elementary (e.g., turn-left).
Parameters of actions can be conditionally dependent or not.
For example, in an action move(x, y) with two parameters
x, y, the choice of parameter y depends on the chosen x. As
a special action class, we introduce set actions, where any
subset of objects can become a parameter (e.g., select(X ),
where X is an arbitrary set of nodes). An action is available
only if all its pre-conditions in a particular state are met. As
an example, an open(x) action may be unavailable unless
the object x contains a feature specifying it is closed.
The action space A is problem-dependent and also state-
dependent (the number of objects may change, pre-
conditions may disable some actions). For instance, in the
game of BlockWorld, there is a single two-parameter action
move(x, y) with a pre-condition that there is no block on
top of x, and neither on y (unless y is the ground).
3. Method
Our method uses GNNs (Zhou et al., 2018) to process the
complex state. To tackle the multi-parameter actions, we
use auto-regressive policy decomposition (Vinyals et al.,

--- PAGE 4 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
2017). Our model is fully differentiable and can be trained
by any policy gradient algorithm (Li, 2018).
3.1. Graph Neural Network
Because the state is represented as a graph, the natural
choice is to use GNNs, which have strong relational induc-
tive biases (Battaglia et al., 2018) and their operations are
local and invariant to node permutations. Also, the same
model can be used to process states with a different number
of objects. Several GNN variations exist, with a unifying
framework made by Battaglia et al. (2018). We use a custom
implementation that includes node and edge features, skip
connections, a global node with an attention mechanism,
and separate parameters for each message passing step. The
exact details are given in the Appendix.
The GNN accepts the state graph (V, g, E), where V are
nodes, E are oriented edges, and g is a special global node.
If available, g can initially contain the global context. Sev-
eral message-passing steps are performed, and the ﬁnal em-
beddings are saved in V and g. For simplicity, let v ∈ V and
g also denote the ﬁnal embedding vector of the respective
nodes.
3.2. Policy decomposition
The policy π(s) is a probability distribution over all possible
actions in a state s. Usually, the action space grows expo-
nentially with the number of actions’ parameters. However,
such policy can be decomposed into a sequence of choices
and the complexity lowered to linear. For now, let a be a
particular choice of action with its parameters, denoted as
a tuple a = (a0, a1, ..., aL(a)). Here, a0 denotes the action
identiﬁer (e.g., stop, move, etc.), a1, a2, ... its parameters,
and L(a) its arity. The action parameters are the graph’s
nodes, a1..|L(a)| ∈ V . The policy can then be represented in
an auto-regressive manner (Vinyals et al., 2017):
π(a|s) = π0(a0|s)
L(a)∏
l=1
πa0,l(al|a<l, s)
where π0 is the policy selecting the action identiﬁer, and
πa0,l is the policy selecting a parameter l of the action a0.
In their method, Vinyals et al. (2017) chose to disregard the
conditional dependency on the previously chosen parame-
ters. However, this variant cannot represent every possible
probability distribution, and for some actions, the previously
selected parameters are crucial for further selection. E.g.,
in move(x,y), the selection of y only makes sense with a
known x. Therefore, we propose a method to preserve the
conditional dependency below (see Figure 3).
In the previous step, the GNN processed the state infor-
mation into node embeddings
V and the global context g;
Figure 3: The embeddings of nodes V and the global context
g created by the GNN are used to select actions. First, the
action identiﬁer a0 (e.g., move) is selected, based on the
global context g. Then, parameters a1, a2, ... are sequen-
tially selected, conditioned on the previous selection.
hence π(s) = π(g, V). If we disregard the pre-conditions
for now, the number of a0 actions is static. Therefore, the
action identiﬁer can be selected only with the global context,
a0 ∼ π0(g). We implement π0 as a single softmax layer,
with one output for each a0.
For elementary actions without parameters, the decision
ends here. Otherwise, the parameters are dependent on
the action identiﬁer and previously selected parameters,
al ∼ πa0,l(a1, ..., al− 1, g, V). The ﬁrst parameter can be
chosen directly, a1 ∼ πa0,l(g, V). To select parameters
when l ≥ 2, the information about previous selections has
to be given to the model. We implement this by augment-
ing the existing node embeddings with one-hot encoding of
previous selection. Every node v ∈ V is augmented with a
binary vector zv of size l − 1, where zv
i denotes whether the
node v was selected as a i-th parameter, zv
i = 1 if ai = v,
else 0. To preserve the original embedding size, the aug-
mented vector is transformed to its original size with a single
non-linear layer. Next, two message-passing steps are used
to allow the information to spread, resulting in new embed-
dings V ′, g′. The choice is then made, al ∼ πa0,l(g′, V ′).
Finally, the embeddings V ′, g′ are discarded, and the pro-
cess repeats for the next parameter with original V, g. Each
policy πa0,i is implemented as a linear layer with shared
parameters applied to each node v and taking softmax.
Pre-conditions determine whether an action is available
in a particular situation. The availability is resolved for
the currently processed level (e.g., for
a0, a1, ...), and the
unavailable actions are removed from the softmax computa-
tion. In the most general case, no selection may be possible
for a particular level l. In that case, the algorithm has to
backtrack, disable the selection at level l − 1 that led to the
situation and select a new parameter.
Set actions
accept an arbitrary subset of nodes as their
parameter. To perform such selection, we use concurrent ac-
tions (Harmer et al., 2018). A shared function with sigmoid
activation is used to compute per-node probabilities p(v).
Then, nodes are selected with independent Bernoulli trials.
Let Υ be the set of selected nodes; the total probability for
this action is then π0(a0|g) ∏
v∈ Υ p(v) ∏
v∈V\ Υ(1 − p(v)).

--- PAGE 5 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
Complexity analysis. In a graph with n nodes and a max-
imal degree k, the time complexity of a message passing
step is O(kn). Parameters of an action with p parame-
ters are selected sequentially, and two message passes are
performed for each. The time complexity of selecting the
action is then
O(pkn), while k is usually very small. In
the case of set actions, it is O(n), as each node is selected
independently. Information can be sequentially accumu-
lated in nodes; hence space complexity is
O(n) for both
parametrized and set actions.
3.3. Model training
Let θ be the model parameters – a union for all φ func-
tions and layers used in the action selection. Apart from
the parametrized policy
πθ, the model outputs a value es-
timate of a state, dependent on the ﬁnal global context,
Vθ(s) = Vθ(g), implemented as a single linear layer. Al-
though the action selection involves deterministic choices
of their parameters, the ﬁnal product πθ(a|s) is fully differ-
entiable. We propose to use A2C algorithm, a synchronous
version of A3C (Mnih et al., 2016), with a few modiﬁcations.
More details about the implementation are in the Appendix.
4. Experiments
To demonstrate our method’s generality and performance,
we provide an implementation 1 and experimental results in
three distinct domains. Each of the tested domain focus on
a slightly different aspect. In BlockWorld, we showcase a
two-parameter action with conditional dependency between
the parameters and pre-conditions. In Sokoban, ﬁve single-
parameter actions are used. The domain is modiﬁed to show
that the framework can issue macro-actions that control
the environment on the level of objects, while a low-level
planner breaks them to micro-actions. SysAdmin is a graph
domain where we demonstrate set actions.
We provide only a brief description of each domain and how
the state and actions are modeled due to the limited space.
For precise deﬁnitions, please see the Appendix, which also
describes the model architecture and hyper-parameters.
Time-limits. The used environments are not restricted by
any time horizon, hence we use a discount factor γ = 0.99
in all domains. To enhance the training experience diversity
and avoid possible deadlocks (e.g., in Sokoban), we employ
an artiﬁcial step limit (100 in BlockWorld and SysAdmin,
200 in Sokoban). This limit is regarded as auxiliary and not
part of the environment, in the spirit of Pardo et al. (2018).
Reference machine.
When we report our algorithm’s run-
ning times in the following text, we are using our reference
machine equipped with AMD Ryzen 1900X CPU, 8 GB of
1The code is at github.com/jaromiru/sr-drl.
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 192 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 293 304 5 6 7 8 9
number of blocks ( N )
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.98
0.95
0.93
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.83
0.83
0.79
0.78 0.78
0.73 0.72
0.70
0.64
0.63 0.63
0.57
0.55
0.54
0.54
0.99
0.98
0.87
0.89
0.96
0.95
0.93
0.91
% solved
optimality
Figure 4: The agent trained in BlockWorld with 5 blocks
(N = 5 ) is evaluated in problems with N ∈ { 2..30}. For
each N , the agent is evaluated in 1000 problems, and the
percentage of solved problems and its optimality is reported.
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
epoch
0.0
0.5
1.0
% solved
optimality
Figure 5: Training in the BlockWorld environment, N = 5,
each epoch equals 256k environment steps. The graph
shows the percentage of solved problems and optimality
(optimal / performed steps). The mean ± one standard devi-
ation of eight randomly initialized runs is displayed.
RAM, and nVidia Titan X GPU.
4.1. BlockWorld
BlockWorld is a well-known domain with tractable satis-
ﬁcing planning and NP-hard optimal planning (Slaney &
Thi
´ebaux, 2001). This environment consists of N blocks
and a special ground object. The blocks can be placed on
top of each other or on the ground. A single move(x, y) ac-
tion with two parameters is available, which picks a block x
and put it on top of y. Its pre-conditions are that x and y are
free, unless y is the ground. The goal is to reconﬁgure the
blocks from a starting position to a given goal position. The
agent receives a small penalty per each step and a reward for
solving the problem. See Appendix for the exact deﬁnition.
We trained eight models with different seeds in the Block-
World environment with N = 5 and randomly generated
initial states and goals. The agent is evaluated on 1000 ran-
dom problems with N = 5 , and we report the percentage
of solved problems and optimality – the average ratio of
the number of optimal steps and performed steps for each
problem. In case the agent does not solve the environment
in the 100 step limit, we consider the ratio to be 0. Figure 5
shows the ﬁrst 200 epochs, where a single epoch is 256k en-
vironment steps. On our reference machine, a single epoch
takes about 3.3 minutes; 100 epochs about 5.5 hours.
At about epoch 75, the agent learns to solve the problems
with 100% accuracy and 83% optimality. Subsequently, the
optimality increases; in epoch 200 it’s 96%, and it reaches

--- PAGE 6 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
99% in epoch 400. Hence, it can be said that the agent is
able to learn near-optimal policy in this setting.
In the next experiment, we investigated whether the agent
can solve this environment without pre-conditions. That
is, all actions are available, but the nonsensical actions do
not change the state. Our experiment conﬁrms that the
agent learns to ignore the nonsensical actions; however, the
training time is almost doubled. In this case, the agent solves
100% of problems at about epoch 130 and reaches 99%
optimality at about epoch 730. We conclude that the pre-
conditions are not necessary, but greatly help the training.
4.1.1. A GENT ’ S GENERALIZATION
Next, we focused on the agent’s generalization to a different
number of blocks. From the eight runs with N = 5 , we
picked the one that performed best after 800 epochs. Next,
we evaluated it in environments with a different number of
blocks, N ∈ { 2..30}. Again, we measured the percentage
of solved environments (within the 100 step limit) and the
agent’s optimality. Because in BlockWorld, the optimal
planning is NP-hard, we report the optimality only for N ≤
10; it becomes too expensive to compute with higher N . The
results, reported in Figure 4, show impressive generalization
capabilities. The agent zero-shot generalizes with great
success to other problem sizes. It solves all problems for
N ≤ 5 with near-100% optimality, with an exception of
N = 3 . With N ≥ 6, the fraction of solved problems
gradually decreases to 78% for N = 20 and 54% for N =
30. The optimality decreases to 87% for N = 10.
When we tried to train an agent directly with N = 10 ,
the training failed. Y et, the agent trained with N = 5 is
able to solve 98% of problems with N = 10 , with 87%
optimality. Moreover, it gracefully generalizes up to N ≤
30, possibly even more. This indicates a strong potential for
curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009). To understand
how impressive these results are, we note that the number of
all possible block conﬁgurations raise very quickly with N .
Exactly, it is ∑N
i=0
(N
i
) (N − 1)!
(i− 1)! (Slaney & Thi ´ebaux, 2001);
i.e., 501 for N = 5, 5.8 × 107 for N = 10 and 2.7 × 1020
for N = 20. The number of actions is |A| ≤ N 2.
4.1.2. P RIOR -ART
Dˇzeroski et al. (2001) investigated RRL with inductive logic
programming. They focused on a more restrictive Block-
World variant, with only three speciﬁc goals: stacking into
a single tower, unstacking everything to the ground, or mov-
ing a speciﬁc box a on top of b. For each of these goals,
a specialized policy was created, and the authors also re-
ported some degree of generalization to a different number
of blocks (3 to 10). However, the used speciﬁc goals are
trivial compared to the setting we use (any block conﬁgura-
tion as a goal). Also, due to a different evaluation procedure,
the exact comparison is impossible without carefully reim-
plementing and evaluating their method.
Recently, Payani & Fekri (2020) approached the RRL prob-
lem with differentiable inductive logic programming, in
which a set of predicates is deﬁned, and their probabili-
ties are learned by gradient descent. The advantage of the
approach is that alternative high-level predicates can be in-
cluded to facilitate the learning. The work also focuses
on the BlockWorld problem, with an input represented as
an image. However, it is unclear if their approach scales
and generalizes, as the authors only train and evaluate their
algorithm with 4 and 5 blocks.
4.2. Sokoban
Sokoban (see Figure 6) is a classic planning domain, where
an agent moves inside a grid maze with the goal of push-
ing boxes onto their destination. Solving levels requires
careful planning because some actions are irreversible and
can lead to an unsolvable situation. Usually, the actions
control the player avatar and are elementary – left, up, right,
and down. To demonstrate our framework’s power, we de-
cided to deﬁne new actions that operate directly on the
boxes, with a low-level planner that translates them into the
elementary actions while preserving all the environment’s
mechanics. The new actions are push-left(x), push-right(x),
push-up(x), and push-down(x), and all operate on a box
x, moving the player such that the box is pushed to the
indicated direction, if possible. While it may seem unfair to
other Deep RL methods that use elementary actions, we note
that these macro actions are only possible in our framework
and showcase its strength. Also, note that our framework
can work with the elementary actions too.
We trained three models with a dataset of 10 ×10 problems
with four boxes over the course of 17 days. Figure 7-left
shows the test set performance measured during the training
(elementary steps are used). We also show the performance
of two other Deep RL-based architectures: I2A (Racani `ere
et al., 2017) and DRC (Guez et al., 2019), as reported in the
original papers (both were trained with the same dataset).
I2A is based on convolutional neural networks (CNN) and
learns an environment model used to simulate trajectories;
I2A with 15 unrolls is reported. DRC is a recurrent CNN-
based architecture; the DRC(3,3) version is reported.
After 109 elementary environment steps, SR-DRL solves
96% of test levels. In the same amount of steps, I2A reaches
90% solved levels, and DRC 99%. We hypothesize that
the main advantage of DRC architecture is in its recurrence,
allowing it to store intermediary calculations between steps
and thus be much more effective. Recurrent architecture
can be also used with our method and is a promising future
direction. Although DRC outperforms our method in this

--- PAGE 7 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
8×8 10×10 13×13 15×15
3 boxes 4 boxes 5 boxes 5 boxes
96.7% 96% 86.9% 89%
Figure 6: We evaluated an agent trained solely on the 10 ×10
levels with 4 boxes on randomly generated levels in other
game variations and measured the percentage of solved
levels. The agent generalizes well to different game sizes
and the box count. The results show the performance of a
single agent evaluated in about 1000 problems per variation.
The top row shows example levels.
0 2 4 6
Environment steps
1e8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
% of solved problems
SR-DRL
I2A
DRC
0 1 2 3 4 5
Environment steps
1e8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction of solved problems
msg. passes
10
5
3
1
Figure 7: Left: Test-set performance during training on
10×10 levels with 4 boxes. SR-DRL shows mean ± one
standard deviation of three models. I2A and DRC are differ-
ent Deep RL based algorithms. Right: Number of message
passes greatly inﬂuences the model’s performance. With
more than 10 message passes, the model failed to train.
case, it cannot generalize to different problem sizes. Its
CNN architecture ends with a fully connected layer, ﬁxing
it to the particular problem size.
Contrarily, our method is not ﬁxed to any problem size. In
Figure 6, we report results obtained by evaluating a model
trained in 10 ×10 problems with 4 boxes on several different
problem sizes. The results are impressive – the model gen-
eralizes well to both smaller and larger environments, e.g.
in 8×8 with 3 boxes it solves 96.7% of problems, in 15 ×15
with 5 boxes it is 89%.
In a separate experiment, we tested the inﬂuence of the
number of message passing steps. Figure 7-right shows
the training progress with 1, 3, 5 and 10 message passes.
More message passes always result in faster learning and
better ﬁnal performance. With more message passes (we
tested 15 and 20) the model did not train at all, and the ﬁnal
performance was zero.
4.3. SysAdmin
SysAdmin (Guestrin et al., 2003) (see Figure 8) is a prob-
abilistic planning domain adapted from the International
Probabilistic Planning Competition (IPPC) 2011. It includes
stochastic transitions and an inﬁnite time horizon, without
any speciﬁc goal to reach. In this domain, the problem is
deﬁned as a graph of dependencies between
N computer
nodes. At each time-step, any computer can be either on-
line or ofﬂine. Online computers have a certain probability
of becoming ofﬂine, based on the state of their dependen-
cies, and ofﬂine computers have a chance to spontaneously
reset and become online. We investigate two variants of
the problem: In SysAdmin-S (S for
Single), the agent can
perform a reset(x) action, that resets a single computer. In
SysAdmin-M (M for Multi), a set action reset(X ) reboots an
arbitrary set of computers at once. At each step, the agent is
rewarded for each computer that is online at that moment
and penalized for any computer it reboots.
For each N ∈ { 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, 160}, we train eight SR-
DRL agents for 50 epochs (each epoch being 25 600 envi-
ronment steps). We also select a single agent trained for
N = 10 and evaluate it in different problem variations. In
each setting, we also measured the performance of PROST,
an MCTS-based probabilistic planner (Keller & Eyerich,
2012; Keller & Helmert, 2013), with a time allowance of 0.1
or 10 seconds per step. We designed two baseline algorithms
that we use to normalize the results: In SysAdmin-S, a ran-
dom ofﬂine node is selected at every step (or none, if there
is not any). In SysAdmin-M, all ofﬂine nodes are selected
for a reset at each step. On our reference machine, the train-
ing time of the SR-DRL algorithm is 15/20/30/50/90/150
minutes for N = 5 /10/20/40/80/160, respectively. Dur-
ing testing, the model needs about 1 ms per step.
For both SysAdmin-S/-M, all models are evaluated in 100
problem instances with a 100 step limit. The mean results
with a 95% conﬁdence interval are reported in Figure 9. The
ﬁrst observation is that in all instances and both SysAdmin-
S/-M, the agent trained with N = 10 and evaluated for
different N performs almost the same as an agent speciﬁ-
cally trained in the respective setting. This result indicates
that the policy learned for N = 10 is directly applicable
even for N = 160.
When compared to PROST, the SR-DRL algorithm performs
similarly in the SysAdmin-S variation. It performs slightly
worse for N ∈ { 5, 10, 20}. For N = 80 and 160, SR-
DRL performs slightly better than PROST with 10s per step,
while the gap widens when compared to PROST with a 0.1s
step limit. We emphasize that our algorithm needs only
1ms per step to decide, after trained. I.e., for N ≥ 80 and
100 step limit, PROST-10s needs over 16 minutes to solve
the problem, while SR-DRL needs only 0.1 seconds and
achieve better performance. Moreover, the training cost

--- PAGE 8 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
Figure 8: In SysAdmin-M, SR-DRL learns to preventively
reset nodes that have a high probability of failure. The graph
shows the dependency network and the reset probabilities
the algorithm assigns to the nodes. Read any edge (a, b) as
b depends on a.
Figure 9: The ﬁgure shows normalized results in SysAdmin-
S (a single node can be reset) or -M (multiple nodes can be
reset at once). SR-DRL( N ) is trained for the speciﬁc N ,
SR-DRL(10) is a model trained with N = 10 and evaluated
in a different setting. PROST is a probabilistic planner
with either 0.1s or 10s time limit per step. Rewards were
normalized using baseline algorithms.
is easily amortized, especially after we showed that once
trained model generalizes perfectly to different settings.
In SysAdmin-M, the ﬁrst observation is that the baseline
algorithm is very strong, and only PROST-10s with
N =
5 signiﬁcantly exceeds its performance. Note that with
N = 10 , PROST-10s reaches only 73% of the baseline’s
performance. However strange, this result was conﬁrmed
with several repeated experiments. In this setting, PROST
needs to enumerate all action combinations, resulting in
O(2N ) space complexity, which becomes infeasible for
N > 20. Also, even for lower N , PROST cannot run with
less than 5 seconds per step. Comparatively, the SR-DRL
algorithm works well even for N = 160.
In Figure 8, we analyzed the behavior of an agent trained
in SysAdmin-M to see whether it simply implements the
baseline algorithm (i.e., to always reset all ofﬂine nodes).
We found that the algorithm learns to selectively restart even
the online nodes if their failure chance is high (based on
the state of their dependencies). However, it seems that the
advantage over the baseline algorithm is not signiﬁcant.
5. Conclusion
We presented a generic framework based on deep reinforce-
ment learning and graph neural networks for solving re-
lational domains. The method operates with a symbolic
representation of objects, their relations, and actions ma-
nipulating them. We described a generic way to implement
multi-parameter actions with mutually dependent parame-
ters, and set actions that select an arbitrary subset of objects.
Both action variations operate in linear time and space, w.r.t.
the number of objects. One of the great advantages of the
framework is that a trained model is not ﬁxed to speciﬁc
problem size and can be immediately applied to problems
of different sizes.
We demonstrated the framework in three distinct domains,
and in all, it achieved competitive performance. In addition,
it showed impressive zero-shot generalization to different
problem variations and sizes. In BlockWorld, the model
trained solely with ﬁve objects solves 78% of problems with
20 objects, even though the state space grows exponentially
with the number of objects. In Sokoban, we show that the
method can be joined with a low-level planner and control
the environment on its macro-level. When trained solely on
10×10 problems with four boxes, it solves 89% of 15 ×15
problems with ﬁve boxes. In SysAdmin, once trained model
transfers almost perfectly to any other problem size. More-
over, we demonstrated the framework’s capability to select
multiple objects at once with a single action. Comparatively,
a widely used PROST planner cannot work in this setting
with a reasonable number of objects due to its exponential
complexity.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the European Ofﬁce of
Aerospace Research and Development (grant no. FA9550-
18-1-7008) and by The Czech Science Foundation (grants
no. 18-21409S and 18-27483Y). The GPU used for
this research was donated by the NVIDIA Corporation.
Computational resources were supplied by the project
”e-Infrastruktura CZ” (e-INFRA LM2018140) provided
within the program Projects of Large Research, Devel-
opment and Innovations Infrastructures. The authors ac-
knowledge the support of the OP VVV funded project
CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16 019/0000765 “Research Center for
Informatics”.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
References
Adjodah, D., Klinger, T., and Joseph, J. Symbolic relation
networks for reinforcement learning. Relational Repre-
sentation Learning Workshop, 2018.
Bapst, V ., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Doersch, C., Stachenfeld,
K., Kohli, P ., Battaglia, P ., and Hamrick, J. Structured
agents for physical construction. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning , pp. 464–474. PMLR, 2019.
Battaglia, P . W., Hamrick, J. B., Bapst, V ., Sanchez-
Gonzalez, A., Zambaldi, V ., Malinowski, M., Tacchetti,
A., Raposo, D., Santoro, A., Faulkner, R., et al. Rela-
tional inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261, 2018.
Bengio, Y ., Louradour, J., Collobert, R., and Weston, J.
Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of the 26th annual
international conference on machine learning , pp. 41–48,
2009.
Dˇzeroski, S., De Raedt, L., and Driessens, K. Relational
reinforcement learning. Machine learning, 43(1-2):7–52,
2001.
Garg, S., Bajpai, A., and Mausam. Size independent neural
transfer for RDDL planning. In Benton, J., Lipovetzky,
N., Onaindia, E., Smith, D. E., and Srivastava, S. (eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Confer-
ence on Automated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS
2018, Berkeley, CA, USA, July 11-15, 2019 , pp. 631–636.
AAAI Press, 2019. URL https://aaai.org/ojs/
index.php/ICAPS/article/view/3530.
Garg, S., Bajpai, A., and Mausam. Symbolic net-
work: Generalized neural policies for relational MDPs.
In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020,
Virtual Event , volume 119 of Proceedings of Ma-
chine Learning Research, pp. 3397–3407. PMLR, 2020.
URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
garg20a.html.
Garnelo, M., Arulkumaran, K., and Shanahan, M. Towards
deep symbolic reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.05518, 2016.
Guestrin, C., Koller, D., Parr, R., and V enkataraman, S.
Efﬁcient solution algorithms for factored MDPs. Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 19:399–468, 2003.
Guez, A., Mirza, M., Gregor, K., Kabra, R., Racani `ere,
S., Weber, T., Raposo, D., Santoro, A., Orseau, L.,
Eccles, T., et al. An investigation of model-free
planning: boxoban levels.
https://github.com/
deepmind/boxoban-levels/, 2018.
Guez, A., Mirza, M., Gregor, K., Kabra, R., Racani `ere, S.,
Weber, T., Raposo, D., Santoro, A., Orseau, L., Eccles,
T., et al. An investigation of model-free planning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2464–
2473. PMLR, 2019.
Hamrick, J. B., Allen, K. R., Bapst, V ., Zhu, T., McKee,
K. R., Tenenbaum, J., and Battaglia, P . W. Relational in-
ductive bias for physical construction in humans and ma-
chines. In Kalish, C., Rau, M. A., Zhu, X. J., and Rogers,
T. T. (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society, CogSci 2018, Madison, WI,
USA, July 25-28, 2018 , 2018.
Harmer, J., Gissl ´en, L., del V al, J., Holst, H., Bergdahl, J.,
Olsson, T., Sj¨o¨o, K., and Nordin, M. Imitation learning
with concurrent actions in 3D games. In 2018 IEEE
Conference on Computational Intelligence and Games
(CIG), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2018.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learn-
ing for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 770–778, 2016.
Helmert, M. The fast downward planning system. Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 26:191–246, 2006.
Helmert, M. and Domshlak, C. Lm-cut: Optimal planning
with the landmark-cut heuristic. Seventh international
planning competition (IPC 2011), deterministic part , pp.
103–105, 2011.
Jaderberg, M., Czarnecki, W. M., Dunning, I., Marris, L.,
Lever, G., Castaneda, A. G., Beattie, C., Rabinowitz,
N. C., Morcos, A. S., Ruderman, A., et al. Human-level
performance in 3D multiplayer games with population-
based reinforcement learning. Science, 364(6443):859–
865, 2019.
Keller, T. and Eyerich, P . PROST: Probabilistic planning
based on UCT. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second
International Conference on Automated Planning and
Scheduling (ICAPS 2012) , pp. 119–127. AAAI Press,
2012.
Keller, T. and Helmert, M. Trial-based heuristic tree search
for ﬁnite horizon MDPs. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Third International Conference on Automated Planning
and Scheduling (ICAPS 2013), pp. 135–143. AAAI Press,
2013.
Kipf, T. N. and Welling, M. Semi-supervised classiﬁca-
tion with graph convolutional networks. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
Leibo, J. Z., d’Autume, C. d. M., Zoran, D., Amos, D.,
Beattie, C., Anderson, K., Casta ˜neda, A. G., Sanchez, M.,
Green, S., Gruslys, A., et al. Psychlab: a psychology
laboratory for deep reinforcement learning agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.08116, 2018.
Li, R., Jabri, A., Darrell, T., and Agrawal, P . Towards
practical multi-object manipulation using relational re-
inforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11032,
2019.
Li, Y . Deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.06339, 2018.
Lillicrap, T. P ., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T.,
Tassa, Y ., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous con-
trol with deep reinforcement learning. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay reg-
ularization. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017.
Maas, A. L., Hannun, A. Y ., and Ng, A. Y . Rectiﬁer non-
linearities improve neural network acoustic models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2013.
Mnih, V ., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., V eness,
J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidje-
land, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):
529–533, 2015.
Mnih, V ., Badia, A. P ., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap,
T., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asyn-
chronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2016.
Pardo, F., Tavakoli, A., Levdik, V ., and Kormushev, P . Time
limits in reinforcement learning. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning , pp. 4045–4054, 2018.
Payani, A. and Fekri, F. Incorporating relational back-
ground knowledge into reinforcement learning via dif-
ferentiable inductive logic programming. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.10386, 2020.
Pevn´y, T. and Somol, P . Discriminative models for multi-
instance problems with tree structure. In Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Security, pp. 83–91. ACM, 2016.
Racani`ere, S., Weber, T., Reichert, D., Buesing, L., Guez,
A., Rezende, D. J., Badia, A. P ., Vinyals, O., Heess, N.,
Li, Y ., et al. Imagination-augmented agents for deep rein-
forcement learning. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp. 5690–5701, 2017.
Redmon, J. and Farhadi, A. YOLOv3: An incremental
improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02767, 2018.
Sanner, S. Relational dynamic inﬂuence diagram language
(RDDL): Language description. Unpublished manuscript.
Australian National University, 32:27, 2010.
Santoro, A., Raposo, D., Barrett, D. G., Malinowski, M.,
Pascanu, R., Battaglia, P ., and Lillicrap, T. A simple neu-
ral network module for relational reasoning. In Advances
in neural information processing systems, pp. 4967–4976,
2017.
Schrader, M.-P . B. gym-sokoban. https://github.
com/mpSchrader/gym-sokoban, 2018.
Slaney, J. and Thi´ebaux, S. Blocks world revisited. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 125(1-2):119–153, 2001.
Vinyals, O., Ewalds, T., Bartunov, S., Georgiev, P ., V ezhn-
evets, A. S., Y eo, M., Makhzani, A., K¨uttler, H., Agapiou,
J., Schrittwieser, J., et al. Starcraft II: A new challenge for
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04782,
2017.
Zaheer, M., Kottur, S., Ravanbakhsh, S., Poczos, B.,
Salakhutdinov, R. R., and Smola, A. J. Deep sets. In
Advances in neural information processing systems , pp.
3391–3401, 2017.
Zambaldi, V ., Raposo, D., Santoro, A., Bapst, V ., Li, Y .,
Babuschkin, I., Tuyls, K., Reichert, D., Lillicrap, T.,
Lockhart, E., et al. Deep reinforcement learning with
relational inductive biases. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2019.
Zelinka, M., Y uan, X., Cote, M.-A., Laroche, R., and
Trischler, A. Building dynamic knowledge graphs from
text-based games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09532 ,
2019.
Zhang, Y ., Vuong, Q. H., Song, K., Gong, X.-Y ., and Ross,
K. W. Efﬁcient entropy for policy gradient with multidi-
mensional action space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00589,
2018.
Zhou, J., Cui, G., Zhang, Z., Y ang, C., Liu, Z., and Sun,
M. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and
applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08434, 2018.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
A. Domain deﬁnitions
A.1. BoxWorld
Deﬁnition.
The objects in the BlockWorld problem consist of a set of N blocks B = {b1, b2, ..., bN } and a special object
G, representing the ground. Let’s deﬁne a relation x ⊣ y; x ∈ B , y ∈ B ∪ G, meaning that a block x is positioned on top of
y. For each x, the relation is unique, as well as for each y, unless y = G. Let R be a set of all relations in the problem. The
action move(x, y) removes all relations x ⊣ z; ∀z from R and creates a new one x ⊣ y. The pre-conditions for the action
are x ̸= y, f ree(x) and f ree(y) ∨ y = G, where f ree(x) ⇔ ∄z : z ⊣ x.
The goal is to use the action move to reconﬁgure the block positions Rstart into Rgoal. To incentivize the agent to ﬁnd the
optimal solution, it receives a reward − 0.1 for each action. After reaching the goal, the episode ends with a reward 10.
State and actions. The state consists of the objects B, G, the current set of relations R, and the goal Rgoal (see Figure 2
for illustration). In the graph, each relation is modeled symmetrically (both above-of and below-of are included). The
different types of relations are marked by their edge parameters. The objects contain a single-bit feature that signiﬁes
whether they belong to B or G. Note that no block lables are present in the state in any way.
There is a single action move with two parameters. The pre-conditions are used according to their deﬁnition. If a particular
block is allowed to be the ﬁrst parameter of the action move, there always exists a valid second parameter (e.g., G).
Generation. A problem is generated as follows. From a set of N available blocks B′ = b1, ..., bN a random subset of 1 to
|B′|blocks is chosen and stacked in random order. This stack is then removed from B′, and the procedure repeats until B′ is
empty. The goal is generated in the same way.
A.2. Sokoban
Deﬁnition.
We use the Sokoban environment as deﬁned in Racani `ere et al. (2017). For our purposes, a Sokoban problem
is determined by four matrices W, G, B, P with sizes corresponding to the problem size. Here, Wxy = 1 if there is a wall at
position x, y, else 0. Similarly, G determines the position of goals, B boxes, and P the player. The agent can perform ﬁve
actions left, right, up, down, and no-op. Without describing the exact mechanics, the actions move the player in the speciﬁed
direction, possibly pushing a box, and modify the matrices B, P accordingly. The no-op action does nothing. The problem
is solved when all boxes are on the goal positions, i.e., B = G.
For each action, the agent receives a penalty − 0.1, plus a reward 1 if it pushes a box on a goal, − 1 if it pushes a box off a
goal, and 10 when the level is solved.
State and actions. A state is deﬁned as a graph with a node nxy for every Wxy = 0, i.e., only the playable spaces without
walls. Compared to convolutional neural networks (CNN), our architecture accommodates to the particular problem and can
save computational resources. The features of every nxy node are deﬁned as a concatenation of Gxy, Bxy and Pxy. We
tried including positional x, y features, but found no difference in performance. Every two neighboring nodes (in the four
directions in the grid) are connected with two opposite edges. Each edge contains a single feature determining its original
direction (up, down, left, right).
Rather than using the elementary actions of the environment, we take advantage of the unique ability of our framework
to deﬁne actions that operate directly on the available objects . We deﬁne the ﬁve following macro actions: move-to(n),
push-left(n), push-right(n), push-up(n), push-down(n). These actions directly select a speciﬁc node and operate upon it. All
actions use a planner that maps them onto the elementary actions of the environment. If a particular action is not executable,
the no-op action is performed. The reward for performing every action is deﬁned as a sum of rewards resulting from the
execution of the related elementary actions. The action move-to(n) walks the player to a location of a node n without moving
any boxes on the way, if possible (i.e., the path exists). Note that this action is not strictly necessary to solve any problem,
but may facilitate some difﬁcult situations. Other push-(n) actions operate directly on the boxes at the place of node n and
push them in the corresponding direction (if possible). Pre-conditions were not used, although it would be possible.
Generation.
We used an implementation of Sokoban provided by Schrader (2018) and the unﬁltered dataset from Guez
et al. (2018), which contains 900k pre-generated levels of size 10 ×10 with 4 boxes. For randomly generated levels, we use a
method described by Racani `ere et al. (2017).

--- PAGE 12 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
A.3. SysAdmin
Deﬁnition.
In the SysAdmin domain, an oriented graph represents a computer network. The nodes represent the computers
C = {c1, c2, ..., cN } and each edge (ci, cj) ∈ E represents a dependency of cj on ci. At each timestep t, each computer can
be either online or ofﬂine. Let ont(c) = 1 if c is online at step t, else it is 0. Let D(cj) = {ci : (ci, cj) ∈ E} be a set of all
computers that cj depends on and let Dont (cj) = {ci : (ci, cj) ∈ E ∧ ont(ci)} be a set of computers that cj depends on and
which are online at step t. At each step, computers which are online have a chance to shut down and ofﬂine computers have
a chance to reboot and become online. Without any intervention, the network evolves as follows:
P
(
ont+1(c) = 1
)
=



0.9 · 1 + |Dont (c)|
1 + |D(c)| if ont(c) = 1
0.04 if ont(c) = 0
At each step t, an action reset(Xt) can be performed. It resets the targeted computers Xt, such that ont+1(c) = 1 : ∀c ∈ X t.
At each timestep, the agent receives a reward:
rt =
∑
c∈ C
ont(c) − 0.75 · |Xt|
We investigate two variants of of the problem: In SysAdmin-S (S for Single), only a single computer can be selected, |Xt| ≤ 1.
In SysAdmin-M (M for Multi), an arbitrary set of computers can be reset.
State and actions. The graph of computers C and static dependencies E constitute the state. Each computer c has a single
bit feature ont(c), determining whether it is online. The edge orientations represent the dependencies. In SysAdmin-S, two
actions are available: noop and reset(c). The ﬁrst action does not select any computer to restart, second action selects one.
In SysAdmin-M, there is only one action reset(X ), implemented as a set action, which allows to select an arbitrary set of
computers.
Generation. For each node of a graph with N nodes, from 1 to 3 (uniformly chosen) other nodes become its dependees.
B. Model architecture & hyper-parameters
For all non-linear layers, we use LeakyReLU activation function (Maas et al., 2013), unless speciﬁed otherwise. Before
processing the state in the GNN, features of each object are embedded into a ﬁxed-length vector of size emb size, with a
shared single non-linear layer. The same parameter emb size then deﬁnes the dimension of all subsequent intermediary
embeddings of nodes and the global context. Edge types are one-hot-encoded and used directly. A mp steps message-
passing steps (eqs. 1, 2) are performed to get the ﬁnal embeddings V, g. AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017)
with a weight decay of 1 × 10− 4 is used. Gradients exceeding grad max norm are normalized to this norm. Learning rate
and entropy regularization coefﬁcient αh are annealed, from their respective starting values LRstart, αhstart, until their
minimum LRend, αhend. Learning rate annealing schedule is step-based, with a factor 0.5 used every 20 × epoch steps.
Coefﬁcient αh is annealed based on 1
t schedule, where t is increased per each epoch steps. For each environment, we deﬁne
a q range interval, that is used to clip the target q in eq. 4. A batch of p envs environments is simulated in parallel. Many
of the parameters were found using a grid-search in their respective domains. Used resources and other hyper-parameters
are available in Table A.1.
C. GNN implementation
First, let us deﬁne the input graph as follows. Let v ∈ V be a node in the set of nodes. Let e ∈ E an edge in the set of edges
and let e.s, e.r denote the sending and receiving nodes of this edge. Let g be a special global node not included in V. For
simplicity, let v, g and e also denote the feature vector of the respective node or edge.
The core of the algorithm is a single message-passing step. First, the incoming messages are aggregated:
∀v : mv = max
e.r=v
φmsg(e, e.s)

--- PAGE 13 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
parameter BlockWorld Sokoban SysAdmin-S/-M
p envs, batch size 256 256 256
ρ, target-network update coefﬁcient 0.005 0.005 0.005
γ, discount factor 0.99 0.99 0.99
epoch, number of steps per epoch 1000 1000 100
episode step-limit 100 200 100
mp
steps number of GNN message-passes 3 10 5
emb size, embedding size 32 64 32
LRstart, initial learning rate 3 × 10− 4 3 × 10− 3 3 × 10− 3
LRend, ﬁnal learning rate 1 × 10− 5 1 × 10− 4 1 × 10− 4
grad max norm, maximal gradient 3.0 5.0 3.0
q range, range of target q (eq. 4) [− 15, 15] [ − 15, 15] [ − 100, 200 ·N ]
αv, coefﬁcient of LV 0.1 0.1 0.1
αhstart, initial coefﬁcient of LH 1 × 10− 4 0.2 0.3/0.3/1.0/1.0/2.0/2.0 in -S
0.3/0.3/3.0/10/20/24 in -M
for N = 5/10/20/40/80/160
αhend, ﬁnal coefﬁcient of LH 5 × 10− 5 0.1 1
2 αhstart
resources used in training 4 CPU cores 2 CPU cores, 1 GPU 1 CPU core
Table A.1: Hyper-parameters and other settings used in the experiments
Here, φmsg is a message embedding function that transforms an incoming message from node e.s over an edge e. The
results are aggregated with an element-wise max function. Another common aggregation operator is mean (Battaglia et al.,
2018); we choose max early in our experiments, where it worked best. Second, all node features are updated with newly
computed values:
∀v : v′ = v + φagg (v, mv, g) (1)
The messages mv are processed with function φagg , which also takes the current embedding of v and the global node
features g. In practice, we implement the φmsg and φagg functions as single non-linear neural network layers. The addition
of the original v represents a skip connection (Kipf & Welling, 2017; He et al., 2016), which we found to facilitate learning
if the number of message-passing steps is large. After all node representations are updated, a global node g aggregates
information from all other nodes through an attention mechanism:
g′ = g + φglb
(
g,
∑
v∈V
φatt(v) ·φf eat(v))
)
(2)
The φatt denotes a softmax distribution over all nodes in V, φf eat a node embedding function and φglb is a ﬁnal embedding
function. In the implementation, φatt is a single linear layer followed by softmax and φf eat and φglb are single non-linear
layers. Again, adding the original g serves as a skip connection to facilitate learning.
The steps (1) and (2) form a single message-passing step. Several steps result in ﬁnal embeddings v ∈ V and g. We use
independent parameters for the φ functions for each step (see Battaglia et al., 2018). In this way, the model can compute
progressively more complex representations.
D. A2C algorithm
Below we present our implementation of the A2C algorithm (Mnih et al., 2016) with a target network (Lillicrap et al., 2016)
and entropy gradient sampling (Zhang et al., 2018).
Let πθ be a policy and Vθ a value estimate, where θ are model parameters. In a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
(S, A, r, t, γ), where S, A are state and action spaces, r, t are reward and transition functions and γ is a discount factor, let
Q(s, a) = Es′∼ t(s,a)[r(s, a, s′) + γVθ(s′)] be a state-action value function and A(s, a) = Q(s, a) − Vθ(s) an advantage
function. Then, the policy gradient ∇ θJ and the value function loss LV are:
∇ θJ = E
s,a∼ πθ,t
[
A(s, a) · ∇ θ log πθ(a|s)
]
(3)

--- PAGE 14 ---
Symbolic Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning based on Graph Neural Networks
LV = E
s,a,s′∼ πθ,t
[
q(s, a, s′) − Vθ(s)
]2
(4)
where the target q is:
q(s, a, s′) =
{
r(s, a, s′) if s′ is terminal
r(s, a, s′) + γVθ′(s′) else
To prevent a target run-away problem in LV , the Vθ′(s′) is estimated using a copy of parameters θ′ that are regularly updated
with θ′ := (1 − ρ)θ′ + ρθ, with ρ ∈ (0, 1]. An entropy regularization term LH is:
LH = E
s∼ πθ,t
[
Hπθ (s)
]
; Hπ(s) = − E
a∼ π(s)
[
log π(a|s)
]
(5)
However, the precise computation of the policy entropy is intractable in our case – only single π(a|s) for the actually
performed action a is available. Therefore, we rewrite the entropy in its gradient form and sample the expectation (Zhang
et al., 2018):
∇ θHπθ (s) = − E
a∼ πθ(s)
[
log πθ(a|s) · ∇ θ log πθ(a|s)
]
The ﬁnal gradient is ∇ θ(− J + αvLV − αhLH ), with αv, αh being learning rate coefﬁcients. We simulate a batch of parallel
environments to gather a better gradient estimate. Per each step of the environment, we perform a single gradient step.
E. Other details
We measured the number of optimal steps in BlockWorld using Fast Downward planner (Helmert, 2006) with A* algorithm
and LM-cut heuristic (Helmert & Domshlak, 2011). The PROST planner used in SysAdmin domain is evaluated with the
preset of International Probabilistic Planning Competition 2014.
E.1. Normalization of the entropy regularization
In the implementation of A2C, we normalize the entropy regularization term with a maximal entropy of a particular state.
The intuition is that because the number of actions is state-dependent, the maximal magnitude of the LH term varies.
However, our tests are yet inconclusive whether this technique brings any beneﬁt; hence we describe it here as a pure
implementation detail. Let
|A(s)|be the number of actions in a particular state s, then the maximal policy entropy is
Hmax(s) = log |A(s)|; the proof is trivial. To stabilize the training, we propose to normalize the LH term with the maximal
possible entropy in a particular state: LH = Es∼ πθ,t
[ Hπθ (s)
Hmax(s)
]
. In states with only a single available action, Hmax(s) is
zero and such state is excluded from the LH computation.